7)

. . . a 3

2023 International Olympic Committee's (IOC) 3

. os . =

consensus statement on Relative Energy Deficiency in 2

hh

Sport (REDs) 8

&

Margo Mountjoy @ ,"* Kathryn E Ackerman © ,? David M Bailey,’ g

Louise M Burke © ,° Naama Constantini,° Anthony C Hackney © ,’ 2

Ida Aliisa Heikura © ,°? Anna Melin,'° Anne Marte Pensgaard @ ,"! 3

Trent Stellingwerff © ,°° Jorunn Kaiander Sundgot-Borgen © ,"? 3

Monica Klungland Torstveit © ,'? Astrid Uhrenholdt Jacobsen,“ Evert Verhagen @,"° &

Richard Budgett, '° Lars Engebretsen, '° Ugur Erdener'”"® 3

e

> Additional supplemental ABSTRACT expenditure (EEE), resulting in low energy avail- 8
material is published oni Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport (REDs) was first ability (LEA). The mathematical formula for energy in
jeu online fhttp./dx dol. introduced in 2014 by the International Olympic availability (EA) that identifies the amount of 8
org/10.1136/bjsports-2023- Committee's expert writing panel, identifying a syndrome energy that the body can contribute to functions 8
106994). of deleterious health and performance outcomes associated with health, well-being and performance o
a experienced by female and male athletes exposed to is well-established in sports science/medicine”*: z

For numbered affiliations see gw energy availability (LEA; inadequate energy intake LS
; in relation to exercise energy expenditure). Since the FA [Energy Availability] = s g
Correspondence to 2018 REDs Consensus, there have been >170 original {EI Energy Intake (kcal)— EEE [Exercise Energy Expenditure (kcal)]} 8 oy
Clinical Professor Margo research publications advancing the field of REDs FFM [Fat—Free Mass (ke) / day] 52
Mountjoy, Family Medicine, science, including emerging data demonstrating the . . . og
McMaster University Michael growing role of low carbohydrate availability, further Scenarios commonly:encountered.in sport include <2 x
aoe 2choo! a Medicine, evidence of the interplay between mental health and extreme values of ‘“ i oe veeion 28
mounting memastecea REDs and more data elucidating the impact of LEA in POWER TO WEIBDE FAHOD. SCOURS ZOE EXCESSIVE oy
—_____ males. Our knowledge of REDs signs and symptoms ness and sport-specific physique alterations. All BQ
Accepted 20 August 2023 has resulted in updated Health and Performance of these scenarios can lead to problematic LEA y5.
Conceptual Models and the development of a novel (see Definitions box 1), which can result in nega- g3

Physiological Model. This Physiological Model is designed "YE health and performance implications known ag

to demonstrate the complexity of either problematic as ‘Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport (REDS), a=

or adaptable LEA exposure, coupled with individual REDs (altered from the original acronym ‘RED-S’ 2G

moderating factors, leading to changes in health and for improved comprehension and dissemination), E3

performance outcomes. Guidelines for safe and effective Was first introduced by the International Olympic g a

body composition assessment to help prevent REDs Committee (IOC) in a consensis! statement in as

are also outlined. A new REDs Clinical Assessment 2014,” and was updated tn) 2018.° Since 2018, there mS

Tool-Version 2 is introduced to facilitate the detection have been considerable scientific advancements in g

and clinical diagnosis of REDs based on accumulated the REDs research field including ~178 REDs and/ =

severity and risk stratification, with associated training or LEA original research publications featuring 8

and competition recommendations. Prevention and ~23 822 participants; (80% female), with ~62% of =

treatment principles of REDs are presented to encourage _ these studies implementing a cross-sectional design, 3

best practices for sports organisations and clinicians. ~14% as longitudinal observational and ~12% g

Finally, methodological best practices for REDs research longitudinal intervention (see literature summary 3

are outlined to stimulate future high-quality research to in online supplemental file 1). These scientific 2

address important knowledge gaps. advances have improved our understanding of the g

underpinning physiology and psychology of REDs )

and the different clinical presentations between XN

INTRODUCTION the sexes. There is a wide range in the reported IN

. Lo . estimated prevalence of LEA/REDs indicators in 2

My body was just deteriorating because it was female (2396-79.5%"!*) and male (15%-70%!2%)
working harder, but with less food. It’s a sign that . 4 oO

© Author(s) (or their everything was basically just shutting down. I'd athletes across a variety of Sports due to the lack 2
employer(s)) 2023. No completely lost control of it [body], yet still thought of a singular definitive diagnosis, mistaken use of ig
commercial re-use. See rights it was just something I had to go through, because LEA and REDs as interchangeable terms, lack of &
and permissions. Published the ultimate aim is a certain weight or look.' standardisation and accuracy of research method- 2
by BM). Athletes are driven by strong internal and external _ologies (eg, inaccurate EA measurements), variation 3
To cite: Mountjoy M, pressure to achieve optimal performance. Many in physiological demands among the study popu- 2
Ackerman KE, Bailey DM, forms of performance pressure contribute to lations and participant study volunteering biases.”! ©
scenarios that either, intentionally or unintention- Compared with previous REDs consensus state- =
2020570731098: ally, alter energy intake (EI) and exercise energy ments, this updated IOC REDs consensus is more a
oT a
BM) Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073-1098. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 paz 1073 =

o

no}

Energy availability Disordered eating behaviours g
Energy availability is the dietary energy left over and available Abnormal eating behaviours including restrictive eating, =
for optimum function of body systems after accounting for the compulsive eating or irregular or inflexible eating patterns, «
energy expended from exercise. Energy availability is expressed excessive exercise beyond assigned training to compensate for z
as kcal/kg FFM/day, and is defined in the scientific literature in dietary intake, and use of purgatives. The behaviours do not meet =
the form of a mathematical formula” *: the clinical criteria for an eating disorder. Fil
EA [Energy Availability] ={EI [Dietary energy Intake (kcal)]- . os . o
EEE TEiereke Energy pendire ikea) FFM [Fat-Free Mass Lite ie nae Waitalemgy tin fos (Gla, . 3
(kg) / day] A syndrome of impaired physiological and/or psychological 3
functioning experienced by female and male athletes that is as

Low energy availability (LEA) caused by exposure to problematic (prolonged and/or severe) @
LEA is any mismatch between dietary energy intake and LEA. The detrimental outcomes include, but are not limited s
energy expended in exercise that leaves the body's total to, decreases in energy metabolism, reproductive function, g
energy needs unmet, that is, there is inadequate energy to musculoskeletal health, immunity, glycogen synthesis and g
support the functions required by the body to maintain cardiovascular and haematological health, which can all 5
optimal health and performance.° LEA occurs as a continuum individually and synergistically lead to impaired well-being, 8
between scenarios in which effects are benign (adaptable increased injury risk and decreased sports performance.” i
LEA) and others in which there are substantial and 8
potentially long-term impairments of health and performance Ke
(problematic LEA). a
robust in its methodology including (1) outlining criteria for =)

Adaptable LEA consensus panel inclusion, thresholds for reaching consensus 2B
Adaptable LEA is exposure to a reduction in energy availability via voting statements, and the provision for dissent?” 2°; (2) oo
that is associated with benign effects, including mild and quickly being supported by a dedicated edition of related reviews 3%
reversible changes in biomarkers of various body systems that and editorials providing detailed context to facilitate further c§
signal an adaptive partitioning of energy and the plasticity of understanding”! **°°; and (3) featuring a blend of science and s &
human physiology. In some cases, the scenario that underpins knowledge translation (implementing an athlete-centric and 2%
the reduction in energy availability (eg, monitored and mindful coach-centric approach). 2 8
manipulation of body composition or scheduled period of The primary target audience for this consensus statement  % .
intensified training or competition) might be associated with includes clinicians and REDs research scientists, with secondary ‘8 §
acute health or performance benefits (eg, increased relative educational materials being developed for coaches and athletes to 5
VO,,,.)- Adaptable LEA is typically a short-term experience support the primary prevention of REDs. We have intentionally 98
with minimal (or no) impact on long-term health, well-being or developed real-world content for clinicians in the athlete health ao
performance. Moderating factors may also alter the expression and performance team involved in the prevention, diagnosis and & =
of outcomes. treatment of REDs.’* *” *” For REDs scientists, in addition toa 2§
Problematic LEA summary of the underpinning science in the field, we have also 3 z
Problematic LEA is exposure to LEA that is associated with provided suggestions for future research implementing recom- se
greater and potentially persistent disruption of various body mended methodologies.” The outcomes of this consensus are SS
systems, often presenting with signs and/or symptoms, and focused on the developing to world-class level athlete (Tiers 2-5). m3
represents a maladaptive response. The characteristics of The goals of this consensus statement are to (1) summarise g
problematic LEA exposure (eg, duration, magnitude, frequency) the recent scientific advances in the field of REDs; (2) intro- =
may vary according to the body system and the individual. duce a novel REDs Physiological Model template and validated g
They may be further affected by interaction with moderating REDs Clinical Assessment Tool-Version 2 (oc REDs CAT2); oy
factors that can amplify the disruption to health, well-being and and (3) provide practical, REDs-related clinical and method- 2
performance. ological research guidelines to promote athlete health and well- S
being, along with safe optimisation of sport performance. This 3

Moderating factors consensus is organised into five sections: (1) What is REDs?, (2) 3
Characteristics of individual athletes, their environment or methodology and consensus results, (3) key scientific advances @
behaviour/activities that may amplify or attenuate the effect of since the 2018 REDs consensus statement, (4) clinical applica- =
LEA exposure on various body systems. Relevant moderating tions and (5) research methodology guidelines. 'S
factors (eg, gender, age, genetics) vary according to the body S
system. They may offer protection or additional risk in the What is REDs? a
progression from LEA exposure to the expression of disturbances Life History Theory proposes that various biological processes a)
to health, well-being or performance. related to growth, health, activity and reproduction compete 8
Eating disorders for finite energy resources, with different priorities depending 3
Mental illnesses clinically diagnosed by meeting defined criteria on the phase in the life cycle and other circumstances.**** In &
characterised by abnormal eating behaviours [eg, self-induced sports science literature, EA to meet various biological functions i
restricting food intake, preoccupation with body shape or is the amount of energy remaining of the EI after the energy 3
weight, bingeing and purging (self-induced emesis, laxative use, demands of exercise are accounted for. Inadequate EI or an Re
excessive exercise, diuretic use)].'72 increased energy commitment to one biological process favours a
trade-offs that allocate energy away from other processes, espe- =~

Continued cially growth, reproduction or maintenance.** In particular, =

1074 Mountjoy M, et a/. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073-1098. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 J

wn

such evolutionary selective pressures have favoured adaptations location, expertise) expert panel of authors was invited, consisting 8
that allocate limited energy supplies during periods of LEA (eg, of sports medicine physicians, a sports endocrinologist, registered a
famines) to biological processes that support immediate survival, sports dietitians, sports physiologists, sports scientists, an athlete, =
as well as long-term reproductive success.** Therefore, humans, a coach and a mental performance consultant. Authors were io
like other animals, are adapted to cope with periods of LEA _ invited based on their expertise, as demonstrated by previous >
by downregulating biological processes that are temporarily research, clinical and/or coaching experiences with REDs. From S|
unnecessary or reducible.** Some of these perturbations to body the entire group of authors, smaller working groups of content c
systems might be considered mild and/or transient, representing experts were tasked with preparing specific subtopics prior to the g
physiological plasticity®> and could be termed adaptable LEA in-person consensus in the form of (1) a referenced summary of oD
(see Definitions box 1). the existing scientific literature and (2) voting statements based 2
However, although humans evolved to be physically active, on key novel and potentially controversial aspects identified =
they did not evolve to tolerate some modern elite training in the literature review. These literature summaries and voting a
programs”® or sports-related practices. This is especially the case statements were compiled, then circulated for online confidential o
in endurance sports (often >30 hours of training/week),*” which voting (Delphi method“). Answer categories were from strongly 2
can sometimes result in extreme EEE that exceeds the capacity disagree, undecided, to strongly agree. We defined three levels ca
of the human alimentary tract for sustained energy absorption.** of agreement based on which subsequent discussions were held: gS
Indeed, the spectrum of exposure to LEA can include scenarios 1. Agreement: =80% of authors agreeing on the voting state- 5
(eg, significant duration, magnitude, frequency—see Defini- ment, without any author disagreeing. <j
tions box 1), that in conjunction with moderating factors (eg, 2. Agreement with minority disagreement: =>80% of authors i
sex, age, health status), are associated with negative effects on agreeing on the voting statement, but with one or more au- 3
various body systems. Such scenarios, termed problematic LEA thors disagreeing. i
manifest as impairments of health and well-being, as well as 3. Disagreement: <80% of authors agreeing on the voting a
interruption to training (adaptation and enhancement of body statement. 3
systems via exposure to physiological stress) or competition Statements without agreement were discussed at the subse- LS
(demonstration of optimal mental and physiological prowess).*” quent meeting held at the Olympic House in Lausanne, Switzer- @
In the real world, athletes experience exposure to LEA (purpose- land (September 2022). Authors were allowed to write a minority 8 3
fully or inadvertently) in various manners along the continuum opinion in the event of disagreement with a statement when the [3
from adaptable to problematic.’ *° Indeed, under certain circum- consensus threshold was reached. The voting statements were s 3
stances, some practices associated with LEA, such as body revised after discussions and then subjected to a second round = ‘S NX
composition manipulation, periods of intensified training or of confidential electronic voting at the end of the meeting (full 2 nS
competition workloads involving prodigious EEE, can be safely details of voting statements, outcomes and actions are available @ o
and effectively periodised into an athlete’s annual plan (eg, the via supplementary materials (online supplemental files 2-4)). RQ
implementation is guided by experts, the athlete has the physical a) =
and psychological readiness, adequate recovery is included, and Consensus results S Q
health is maintained).*! ** In the first round of online voting, we presented 135 evidence e 2
REDs is a clinically diagnosed, multifactorial syndrome char- statements to the panel. Full agreement was reached for 76 & >
acterised by the accumulation of the deleterious health and of the statements. We have outlined our actions taken after 23
performance outcomes resulting from exposure to problematic in-person discussions in table 1. In the second round of confi- 8 =
LEA. Thus, given the significant scientific advances in the field, dential voting, 44 statements were presented to the authors. Se
the updated 2023 definition of REDs is: Of these, 24 were previous statements with disagreement that oo
a syndrome of impaired pliydological anillée psychological required a revote, and 20 were new statements. All voting “3
functioning experienced by female and male athletes that is statements reached an agreement or minority disagreement g
caused by exposure to problematic (prolonged and/or severe) after two rounds of voting, providing a total of 144 state- Oo
low energy availability. The detrimental outcomes include, but ments of which 27 remained with a minority disagreement s
are not limited to, decreases in energy metabolism, reproductive (ie, 80% agreement was reached, but one or more individ- o
function, musculoskeletal health, immunity, glycogen synthesis and uals disagreed with the statement). 3
cardiovascular and haematological health, which can all individually S
and synergistically lead to impaired well-being, increased injury risk Equity, diversity and inclusion statement 6
and decreased sports performance. 3 . 3
A diverse expert panel of authors consisted of sports F

medicine physicians, registered sports dietitians, athletes, a

coaches, sports physiologists, sports scientists and mental ad

Methodology and consensus results performance consultants. Authors were invited based on 8
In addition to facilitating the synthesis of compiled informa- their expertise, as demonstrated by previous research, clin- S
tion, consensus methodology also harnesses experts’ insights to ical and/or coaching experiences with REDs. In total, 10 o
enable more validated recommendations to be made when the females and 7 males from four continents participated. z
published evidence ranges from insufficient to adequate. The ©
goal of consensus methods is to determine how much indepen- Key scientific advances since the 2018 REDs consensus 3
dent and diverse experts agree on nuanced and complex issues statement &
within a defined topic area while seeking to overcome some of _ There has been significant growth in the number of studies .
the drawbacks associated with decision-making in groups or clearly showing that problematic LEA is the underlying aetiology =]
committees, which can be frequently dominated by one indi- of REDs. The new evidence on this topic provides a deeper 9
vidual or coalitions representing vested interests. fundamental understanding of how problematic versus adapt- a
This REDs consensus statement used the RAND-UCLA Appro- able LEA, along with its moderating factors, influences the health =~
priateness Method (RAM).** A diverse (ie, gender, geographic and performance of athletes (see Definitions box 1). The key =
Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 1075 J

wo
Consensus statement 2
TTT_____———eEeeEeEeEeESESESESESESEeEeSeSSSSesesememenlnlrlncnclrnrncnclrceserT CLD?
Table 1 Results of the online Delphi survey and subsequent actions taken a
Total Agreement* Minority disagreementt Disagreement+ =
Round 1 voting 135 76 29 30 [om
Action taken a
Removed in - 2 9 gs
Adjusted wording: revote 23 - 3 20 =
Adjusted wording: no revote 23 23 = = a
Revote 1 - - 1 B
Added statements 20 - - - o
Round 2 voting 44 a1 3 °
Overall outcome 144 117 27 2
“Agreement: = 80% agree without disagreement but potentially includes ‘undecided’ votes. S
‘Minority disagreement: = 80% agree but with one or more disagreeing opinions. S
4Disagreement: <80% agreement. Ss
o.
8
emerging themes are (1) the additive impact of low carbohydrate studies showed indications of LEA and LCA due to large increases 6
availability (LCA) with LEA in the development of REDs; (2) the in training while failing to compensate with increased EI, and thus 3
overlap of REDs and overtraining syndrome (OTS) symptom- may have demonstrated REDs outcomes rather than OTS.*” It is oe
ology; (3) the time-course of biomarker responses to problematic important to note that LEA and/or LCA, although challenging to 3
LEA in the development of REDs; (4) improved understanding assess, should be excluded from an OTS diagnosis as LEA is the o
of mental health associations of REDs; (5) advances in knowl- underlying aetiology for a REDs diagnosis.°” >” g
edge pertaining to REDs in male athletes and (6) para athletes. s
oN
Bet , Time-course of LEA resulting in REDs o>
The magnifying impact of LCA in the context of REDs : 9 , on
radon : : . Although acute mild periods of LEA do not always lead to 39
Most LEA intervention studies are also accompanied by a . or . is 8a
3 ‘ ‘ A adverse outcomes, problematic LEA exposure leads to REDs. o
substantial reduction (25%-60%, depending on magnitude of err . : . . =|
an . . one Our scientific understanding of the time-course of LEA &&
LEA) in carbohydrate (CHO) ingestion, resulting in concurrent : ; : P . : : so
LCA 4“ In th lworld. th itude of LCA is likely to b leading to validated physiological and psychological signs/ g g
. nsthe Leal wore, Themagnince an. WAAS.TKe iy Loi’ symptoms are still emerging, largely due to difficulties in Ss
even greater considering the emphasis on protein intake during cece 4 z . F 2N
‘ods of calori ‘ction 2") Ri ‘ | investi accurately assessing and controlling for EA in prospective 3
Derlods: OF CAlOHe: TestricHons secenty, Several Inyestipa- research.*' Emerging definitions highlight short-term LEAas @U
tions have elucidated CHO’s energy-independent or magnifying . : - BQ
. . a few days to weeks, medium-term as weeks to months and ="
role in REDs-related health outcomes. There have been several 1 37 40 . . us
. aa ong-term as months to years. However, time-course cut- 39
short-term (<6 days) investigations in male endurance athletes 5 : oe nee A 25
° . ae offs require further scientific validation, may differ between GQ
comparing the effects of high energy and high CHO availability, . A ' i ; Q0
: : : males and females and change with the severity and duration @&
high energy with low CHO (<3 g CHO/kg BM/day) but high fat 4 . We : . as
zs 5 eee of LEA dose. Still, some signs/symptoms and REDs outcomes =)
(LCHEF), or low energy with low to moderate CHO availability : ; |
, ; : : : that appear to present temporally to various exposure periods
diets on bone, immunity and iron biomarkers. These studies f : 4 oa
a . . esx of LEA have emerged. Importantly, some short-term signs or $=
have reported increases in bone resorption biomarkers with = dit fi 1 <9
. oe incbi kers of bone formation.» symptoms during the acute assessment may only represent 3.5
4 concomitant impalcment. in. dlemar . : , a snapshot of a current LEA state and require the exclusion 3G
as well as increased postexercise concentrations of interleu- of other: potential actiologies (differential diagnoses). Such mS
kin-6 (IL-6) and hepcidin after LCA. These findings SHEBESE signs or symptoms do not always reflect a problematic LEA 5
deleterious effects on bone, immunity and iron biomarkers as a exposure leading to REDs =
result of LCA, sometimes in the absence of LEA. More recently, . g
a 3-day intervention in young females also showed a 264% =
increase in hepcidin with a low energy, low CHO diet compared Mental health outcomes of REDs 3
with only a 69% increase in hepcidin with isocaloric low energy The sports community has prioritised the mental health of elite- S
but higher CHO diet.’ Additionally, ~3.5 weeks of LCHF level athletes as evidenced by a sharp rise in consensus state- 3
diet in elite endurance athletes resulted in impaired markers of  ments®”*? and prevalence studies**® on this theme. A parallel 3
bone remodelling both at rest as well as around exercise (up to _focus has been the increased awareness of the risk factors for and g
3 hours postexercise),”° and elevated postexercise IL-6 concen- _ the consequences of REDs, where psychological factors contrib- fs)
trations compared with an isocaloric high CHO treatment.’ Six uting to LEA and mental health consequences have been high- NX
studies since 2019 have shown an energy-independent and/or _lighted,* although less well understood.° *° % Recent qualitative IN
magnifying impact of LCA in the accelerated development of studies! ©” involving mainly subelite endurance athletes provide o
REDs outcomes.’**” Accordingly, LEA intervention studies need support for this premise, reporting that LEA from intentional v
to also control and account for CHO intake and need to be of —_(eg, weight regulation) or unintentional (eg, failing to consciously 8
longer duration to determine long-term adaptation. increase EI with increased EEE) origins can be associated with o
short-term positive results such as performance improvements c
Symptomology overlap between REDs and OTS or social approval from the coach and the sports culture.' These .
REDs and OTS are syndromes involving the hypothalamic— short-term ‘positive’ outcomes make it more challenging for S
pituitary—adrenal axis and have no single validated diagnostic athletes to recognise the longer-term potential health and perfor- 9S
biomarker; they feature a complex overlap of symptoms that mance implications of exposure to problematic LEA. ©
hinge on a diagnosis utilising exclusion criteria.*’ ** Accordingly, a Disordered eating (DE) behaviours, eating disorders (EDs) and/ =~
recent narrative review found that 18 of 21 identified OTS-based or REDs are common among certain athlete cohorts.°* LEA and =
et a
1076 Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 ay
7

wn

DE behaviours, which exist along the spectrum between optimised REDs in para athletes 8
nutrition and clinical EDs, may occur in isolation or together. The estimated prevalence of REDs in para athletes is unknown; a
A prior history of DE behaviours or an ED might perpetuate a however, there are concerns that para athletes may be at even =
continued under-fuelling of energy’ and must therefore be consid- higher risk of problematic LEA than able-bodied athletes.!!? io
ered an important risk factor for developing REDs. DE behaviours = Among US para athletes preparing for Paralympic Games, 62% >
and EDs may be exacerbated by social media influence, societal attempted to alter weight or body composition to enhance perfor- S|
pressures, the athlete’s training/coaching entourage, a belief that mance, 32% had elevated scores on the Eating Disorder Exam- c
a specific physique/weight/appearance will improve performance ination Questionnaire (EDE-Q) pathological behaviour subscale g
and/or overall body dissatisfaction.” Given the potentially serious scores and 44% of the female athletes reported menstrual o
outcomes of DE behaviours and EDs, prevention, early identifica- dysfunction.'’? Another study of EA estimates in wheelchair p
tion, and timely interventions should be prioritised.°° ”° athletes reported that nearly the entire cohort fulfilled criteria =
Psychological indicators associated with problematic LEA and of LEA across at least one 24-hour period during the week-long im
REDs are mood disturbances/fluctuations,* ’!”? cognitive dietary study.''* Whether negative body image, risk of LEA and/or DE Px
restraint,” drive for thinness,“ ”* reduced sleep quality®’ ”° and behaviours and EDs are related to their disability, athletic status, S
perfectionistic tendencies.” Depressive symptoms and affec- competitive pressure, training environment or a combination of ca
tive disorders,* *”” subjectively reported reduced well-being,” factors remains to be elucidated. gS
primary or secondary exercise dependence/addiction,*” *! Problematic LEA can lead to impaired bone health and bone- 5
anxiety related to injury and/or recovery, sport-specific issues related injury secondary to factors such as altered skeletal 8
such as difficulty coping with weight requirements’ ”° and the loading experienced by para athletes (ie, the lack of loading °
development of EDs! © are additional adverse mental health stimulus experienced by wheelchair athletes and/or low-impact 3
outcomes associated with problematic LEA and REDs. However, sports). Furthermore, in unilateral amputees, the affected limb i
we must recognise that the picture is still unclear regarding the may exhibit reduced bone mineral density (BMD).'!> Addi- a
dynamics of mental health and DE behaviours according to sex tionally, the presence of central neurological injury may result a
and level of competition,®’ as well as in athletes with physical in alterations of the HPG axis and baseline menstrual function, 8
disabilities.** Furthermore, studies are required to (1) ascertain _regardless of energy status.'!°'!” The risk of bone stress injury 3
why many athletes experience few or no negative mental health (BSI) is of particular concern in athletes with spinal cord injury 8 3
consequences in the early stages of problematic LEA expo- who experience a substantial loss of BMD immediately postin- 3
sure’? *5 and (2) to better understand the reciprocal function jury and hence have a high incidence of low BMD for age and/ g 3
of the different psychological variables.** *” As perceived stress or osteoporosis.!'* Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) ‘S N
appears to be common for many mental health concerns related is the most well-accepted tool for the measurement of BMD, 2 Ss
to LEA and REDs, a heightened focus should be placed on devel- but there are limitations in using standard population compar- & o
oping psychologically safe environments surrounding athletes. ison reporting (eg, Z-scores); normative, reference datasets are AQ
Details on creating safe sport environments are outlined in the determined from measurements in able-bodied populations 23 =
IOC consensus statement on mental health in elite athletes. and stratified by age-matched, sex-matched and limited race/ S sy
ethnicity-matched categories to determine diagnostic cut-offs for ee

‘low BMD for age’ and ‘osteoporosis’.'!? '*° Therefore, there is = 2 =

REDs in male athletes a need for research in a wide variety of para athletes to develop <3
Although the 2014 IOC REDs consensus statement’ and the BMD assessment techniques and reference ranges appropriate 8 =
2018 update paper® alluded to the impact of LEA and REDs in for the para athlete population.'” S z
male athletes, the available research on males at the time was es
scant. Since then, although the research community has empha- REDs Conceptual Models rg
sised the need for studies in men, currently only 20% of original The REDs Conceptual Models were developed to raise aware- g
studies from 2018 to 2022 include male athletes as subjects (see ness of the athletic, coach, sports science and sports medicine =
literature search summary in online supplemental file 1). communities to this syndrome. Figure 1 (REDs Health Model) S$
While a universal cut-off of 30 kcal/kg FFM/day as a threshold and figure 2 (REDs Performance Model) are conceptual models Sy
of LEA leading to some REDs outcomes in females is debated,** that demonstrate the range of body systems for which there is 3
such a cut-off or range at which males experience REDs-related theoretical, empirical, and/or clinical evidence of impairments S
symptoms is even less understood,*” but appears to be lower that manifest in different ways. Undoubtedly, these outcomes 3
(eg, ~9to 25 kcal/kg FFM/day).'” “° °° °! Indeed, there is occur over different timeframes and with different severity and 2
evidence that most males can sustain a lower EA before physi- significance to the individual athlete due to various moderating g
ological and psychological disturbances manifest. Nevertheless, factors.** fs)
problematic LEA can occur in male athletes and is associated Unlike earlier REDs models,’ ° LEA is placed at the centre of S
with negative effects on the hypothalamic—pituitary—gonadal the hub to note its role as an exposure variable. Graded arrows LN
(HPG) axis and associated hormones” °?-!°; changes in meta- illustrate a continuum from adaptable LEA to problematic LEA o
bolic hormones“ '°'~!°°; impairments to immune function!”*; exposure, with the former representing benign physiological v
detriments to bone health'®; as well as negative performance adaptations to energy fluctuations (ie, physiological plasticity),** 8
outcomes!® °° 1° 1° and decreased lean body mass accrual.'°” while the outer region of the hub notes the range of health and 8
Although changes are comparable to those REDs outcomes performance concerns which can be associated with the latter. A &
found in female athletes, the magnitude of the effects on some spectrum of energy mismatches, with differing severity of conse- 2
physiological parameters and the threshold at which these effects quences, was part of the original concept of EA.?* However, the 3
manifest appear to be variable between the sexes. Two emerging updated model uses qualitative terms (adaptable, problematic) 9
potential indicators of REDs in males are the presence of low as an alternative to the previous focus on quantitative assess- ©
libido and decreased morning erections, which have been identi- ments with universally applied thresholds of concern. The most =~
fied as physiological consequences of LEA.'°%"!!! well-documented sequelae of problematic LEA are impairments =
Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 1077 J

wn

of reproductive function and bone health in female and male 8

e enersy De fig; athletes.'*!"'* Tables 2 and 3 summarise these and many other a

> SF conditions associated with LEA in athletes and other popula- =

e . / +> tions. Future updates will likely revise the range of recognised o

2 fepairen : ‘> . =h

S Re product!’ <I sea Ry sequelae associated with REDs as we learn more about the effects 5

°” a as o- of energy allocation and potential prioritisation of various body S|

S pe 2 Sales It is important to note that the REDs Health and Perfor- g
vata \ 1 / ® mance Conceptual Models are not separate entities; they involve o

at \ | PY .. meray considerable overlap. Indeed, presenting this information in 2

function ) ao, Megutation two wheels simply offers different audiences an appreciation of 3

Avalatthhy oy the issues of greatest relevance to them. Each sign or symptom is

imosivos ( OE t = within the REDs Conceptual Models can occur due to aetiolo- Px

PFunetton i“ (Ss gies other than problematic LEA (tables 2 and 3). Therefore, the 2

2) / y \ exclusion of primary aetiologies (differential diagnoses) should ca

sco occur when diagnosing REDs (see Clinical Assessment Tool gS

a section below). 5

Impaired is}

REDs Physiological Model 3

Experts in the field have long realised that applying LEA expo- i

sure (ie, severity, duration, frequency) on subsequent REDs a

short, medium and long-term outcomes is complex and depen- 5

Figure 1 REDs Health Conceptual Model. The effects of LEA exist on dent on many moderating factors. Accordingly, and novel to 8 -
a continuum. While some exposure to LEA is mild and transient termed this 2023 consensus update, a more researched and clinically $3 @
adaptable LEA (arrow depicted in white), problematic LEA is associated based unifying physiological model has been developed. To 8 3
with a variety of adverse REDs outcomes (arrow depicted in red). progress the REDs scientific field forward, we need integrated 5-3.
*Mental Health Issues can either precede REDs or be the result of REDs. dynamic physiological models that can help explain the biolog- 9 &
LEA, low energy availability; REDs, Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport. ical complexity and interaction within and between various <8
body systems, as well as the inconsistencies in the manifestation 93 3

of REDs signs and symptoms resulting from problematic LEA. & o

Ideally, unique physiological models can be developed for each *Q

body system within the Health Conceptual Models (see figure 1) J =

before being integrated to acknowledge substantial physiological S p

‘cross-talk’ among systems. ea

gnersy De fig, Step 1 of the REDs Physiological Model for each body system = >

aa ° 'ey (figure 3) is to identify the range of specific health and perfor- = 3

12? y cy. mance impairments that might occur from LEA exposure, along 9 =

¢ , ee y “a with details of the criterion tests and metrics that best assess the Se

o avaiabity ff > presence of such disturbances. Step 2 is to focus on characteris- oo

eo peceeee \ y hesiaatee io tics of an athlete’s LEA exposure (see figure 3 for examples) that * 3

& biased aA y Pa esha Gy might create a higher risk of it being problematic; for example, g
(ih { |ER) = the duration, magnitude or origin of the LEA mismatch (see a

f — _— figure 3 for examples). Step 3 is to consider moderating factors in s

aN u pf wal an individual athlete’s makeup, behaviours or environment that o

peciesers Le! Decreased may either exacerbate or protect against various LEA-associated 2

Porornanca Be SS ci8y Hot health and/or performance dysfunctions as they related to the g

4 | AN _—— specific body system. A systematic identification of such moder- g

(on EB = ating factors is proposed (figure 3). =

(a) = es The development of a physiological model for each body =

Desreeoed arf \ Erato system, underpinned by a ‘systems biology mindset’,'** will S

Strength Wu skill enable a more nuanced assessment of the individual athlete S

perce, N and whether their specific combination of LEA exposure and N

\ secondary moderators is likely to lead to positive, neutral or 2

negative health and/or performance outcomes. 2

8

Clinical applications a

Figure 2 REDs Performance Conceptual Model. The effects of LEA Assessment of EA 2
exist on a continuum. While some exposure to LEA is mild and transient, Seminal research** '*° around EA in habitually sedentary females 3
termed adaptable LEA (arrow depicted in white), problematic LEA is identified a continuum of zones ranging from low to high risk 9
associated with a variety of adverse REDs performance outcomes (arrow of harm (eg, high EA for mass gain and growth =45 kcal/kg ©
depicted in red). LEA, low energy availability; REDs, Relative Energy FFM/day; adequate EA for weight maintenance and support of =~
Deficiency in Sport. body function = ~45 kcal/kg FFM/day; reduced EA for body =
1078 Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 J

Consensus statement e
2s
Table 2 Potential REDs health outcomes resulting from problematic LEA a
Populations with LEA (assessed =
directly or via surrogates) providing Examples of differential diagnoses (issues oi
Spoke Examples of impairment evidence of impairment to be excluded) a
Ss = ees sss: Se =
Impaired reproductive function Females SRO ERD EAE? Females 4a
Alteration in LH concentrations or pulsatility SF,°° FA‘? "8" Primary amenorrhoea: constitutionally delayed a
Reduced oestrogen and progesterone Fa’”® puberty, various genetic syndromes, anatomic So:
Reduced testosterone Ae abnormalities a
Primary amenorrhoea Shec pA eye Secondary amenorrhoea: pregnancy, PCOS, 2
Oligomenorrhoea/menstrual irregularities FA‘*'~"8? 187 182 190 pituitary mass (eg, prolactinoma), thyroid ©
Secondary amenorrhoea (FHA) CEeUe EA abnormalities a
Luteal phase defects/deficiency sr? FA‘? Other menstrual dysfunction: use of hormonal 3S
Anovulatory cycles birth control methods, physiologic stress =
Males Males wo
Reduced testosterone MAG ees Primary hypogonadism (gonadal disease), 2
Sperm abnormalities ma’ Hypogonadism (eg, hypothalamic/pituitary 3
Erectile dysfunction MA disease), toxic exposures, infection, ES
Females and males psychosomatic neurological dysfunction a
Decreased libido to
ma’? 111194 S
Impaired bone health Longitudinal loss of BMD/lack of expected ANF,'°° FA,'2° MA'?” Low BMD: genetic bone disorders (eg, &
bone accrual or maintenance (younger osteogenesis imperfecta), hyperparathyroidism, 3
populations) poor micronutrient intake (eg, calcium and eA
Lower BMD/low Z-score FAg ee MA eee coro vitamin D), malabsorption disorders (eg, 2
Impaired bone strength or microarchitecture FA??? MA coeliac disease), malignancies (eg, leukaemia, °
Bone stress injuries lymphoma, metastasis), renal diseases, 3
Change/differences in bone remodelling medications (eg, anabolic steroids) ® S
biomarkers FASE 206-208 att BL210 Bone stress injury: on
Sh? pA A ATO2t Naat 212213 External reasons (eg, training errors, surface, es
shoes) or internal issues (eg, body build, roe
medical predispositions as above) c 3
Impaired GI function Abdominal pain/cramps/bloating/alteration FA,°°" 92"4 ma®! Gl diseases (eg, Coeliac disease, inflammatory 92
in bowel movements bowel disease, Helicobacter pylori, gastro- < S
oesophageal reflux, functional dyspepsia/ 2 8
constipation), medications (eg, antidepressants, ort
iron pills, narcotics, laxative/cathartic use in D 9
EDs) Bs
Impaired energy metabolism/ regulation Subclinically or clinically low T3 Gp, 127 165215 216 Fp 49 168170 184188190217 218 Brimary or central (secondary and tertiary) 3 =
ma‘? 12 hypothyroidism, medications/supplements oo
go
Low RMR/RMR ratio a=
Reduced leptin FA's? 189 190 217-222 ma'3 191 223 lomo)
SF 45 160 Fy 47 170 179 188 217 py 46 224 FS 3
Spare [ee MA®? 102 2 =
Increased cortisol Ss =
Increased cortisol: physiologic stress, Cushing @ co
disease, steroid use aa g
Impaired haematological status Low iron status FAs Acute or chronic blood loss (eg, menstrual fom
Increased hepcidin concentrations/response SF? MAl! 227 cycle, GI bleeding), RBC destruction 2
Reduced iron absorption MA”? (eg, haemolysis, haemoglobinopathy, 8
Lower haemoglobin concentration/mass Fa? Ma”? splenomegaly), poor micronutrient intake 3
Reduced response to altitude training maz? (eg, iron, vitamin B.,, folate), bone marrow o
diseases =}
Urinary incontinence Urinary incontinence FAR? Persistent urinary incontinence: trauma (eg, S
childbirth, surgery, radiation), anatomical o
abnormalities, neurological diseases 3
Temporary urinary incontinence: 5
pregnancy, urinary tract infection, constipation, i
certain foods and drugs oS
Impaired glucose and lipid metabolism — Reduced fasting/24-hour glucose Sh 127 FA, 14214218 8s Impaired glucose metabolism: insulinoma, S
Reduced fasting/24-hour insulin SF? FA,{” MA‘ 102 233 234 critical illness, medications, adrenal IN
Elevated total cholesterol/LDL cholesterol —_FA,'®! 3° 236 a7? 192 193 insufficiency a
Impaired lipid metabolism: familial a
hyperlipidaemia >
Mental health issues Depression Fa?8 MA”? Primary psychologic/mood disorders ®
Exercise dependence/addiction FACE MAD ©
DE behaviours/EDs FAS 12219 yan st a
Impaired neurocognitive function Reduced/impaired memory FA,222 ANF??? Dementia (eg, Alzheimer's disease), vitamin .
Reduced/impaired decision-making ANF24° deficiencies, infections, malignancies, ADHD, fo)
Reduced/impaired spatial awareness Fa"! substance use disorder, primary psychologic/ 8
Poor planning/cognitive flexibility ANF? mood disorders, traumatic brain injury S
Reduced executive function FAa?® =
Continued g
e
Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 1079 ay
=

wo
Consensus statement 2
ee 2
Table 2 Continued a
Populations with LEA (assessed =
directly or via surrogates) providing Examples of differential diagnoses (issues [ow
Spoke Examples of impairment evidence of impairment to be excluded) =n
ba A LN ela MEL eT =
Sleep disturbances Sleep disturbances (self-reported) FA,’° MA” Primary psychologic/mood disorders, shift- =
work, obstructive sleep apnoea, chronic pain/ ‘=
injury, nocturia, medications/substance use, o
restless legs syndrome gS
®
Impaired cardiovascular function ECG abnormalities (eg, sinus bradycardia, FA,'°24? MA,’22“4 ANM,”° ANF?“ 247 Bradycardia: Q
QT prolongation and QT dispersion) Genetic, ultra-endurance training, 2
hypothyroidism, medications (eg, beta- =
blockers), toxic exposures, electroconductive 2
Haemodynamic abnormalities (eg, disorders, electrolyte abnormalities Ze
hypotension and orthostatic hypotension, —_FA,7“?248 ANE™4° MA“ 8
syncope) s
Impaired endothelial function/reduced g
blood flow FA,22! 235 243 250-254 MA2> fo)
Cardiac abnormalities (eg, MVP, decreased Hypotension: illness, medications, dehydration a
left ventricular mass, decreased left s
ventricular systolic function, myocardial ANF?2°° ANM245 296 S
fibrosis) a
Reduced skeletal muscle function Reduced rate of muscle protein synthesis FA,2°”-5° smi,26° Ma? 58 Inadequate protein intake 8
Reduced rates of muscle glycogen FA,25" ma‘? 262 Inadequate CHO intake 2
restoration B
Impaired growth and development Reduced IGF-1 SR STES Ea EU Aas ee Constitutional delayed puberty, chronic s
Increased GH/GH resistance SF? FA,'7° ma’? 264 diseases, GH deficiency, congenital or acquired n S
Deviation from the expected growth curve _FA,'®°ANF7°° 75° anM?67 268 hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, genetic = on
defects, hyperprolactinaemia, long-term as
drug use (eg, anabolic steroids, opioids, Og
glucocorticosteroids) c 3
Reduced immunity Increased infection/illness susceptibility FAR eee cees Primary or acquired immune deficiency (eg, 3 3
Change in immune biomarkers FA?” MAZ? chemotherapy, viral infections) EN
Intensive exercise without LEA 2 8
Each of these outcomes can occur in the absence of LEA, therefore the differential diagnosis should be considered in the assessment and diagnosis of REDs severity and/or risk. w ”
Populations providing evidence types: SF: sedentary females; FA: female athletes; ANF: females with anorexia nervosa; MA: male athletes; SM: sedentary males; ANM: males with i) 9

: ESS
anorexia nervosa. “=
ADHD, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; CHO, carbohydrate; ECG, electrocardiogram; EDs, eating disorders; FHA, functional hypothalamic amenorrhoea; GH, growth a =
hormone; Gl, gastrointestinal; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor-1; LDL, low density lipoprotein; LEA, low energy availability; LH, luteinising hormone; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; Qo
: art y : i" , oo
OCD, obsessive compulsive disorder; PCOS, polycystic ovary syndrome; RMR, resting metabolic rate; T3, triiodothyronine. QQ

fy
as
oo
<3
82
mass/fat loss=30-45 kcal/kg FFM/day; and LEA causing health that achieve a harmonised time-course for assessment and the $2
implications <30 kcal/kg FFM/day).'*° The concept of the LEA individual components of EA may assist in future LEA and es
threshold (30 kcal/kg FFM/day), below which health problems REDs activities by standardising the errors and limitations of ™3
occurred, was based on elegant but short-term laboratory studies the assessment, and balancing the issues of time and resource g
that investigated stepwise changes in EA, perturbations of sex burden, feasibility and measurement precision. Future use of =
hormones* '*” '?8 and changes in markers of bone turnover!” standardised methodologies should assist in better assessment of S$
in a small sample of sedentary females. Although this concept EA, more nuanced interpretation of past and future data, and =
was intended as a guide, rather than a diagnostic end-point, better replication or comparison of work in this area. 3
more recent information gleaned from real-life clinical obser- é
vations, as well as short-term studies,** theoretical constructs 3
and methodological challenges in assessment, around the frailty Body composition assessment and management 2.
of a single, universal threshold,'”” have identified large differ- Body composition assessment and management are important $s
ences in the EA level associated with health and performance for optimising health and athletic performance, particularly in c—)
concerns between individuals, the sexes, and among different weight-sensitive and leanness-demanding sports.'*° Athletes may S
body systems. Therefore, although EA calculations may inform experience internal and/or external pressure to attain an ‘athletic nN
research interventions or observations, there are risks in setting look’ (aesthetic), potentially leading to body dissatisfaction and 2
a definitive clinical threshold of EA due to many moderating LEA, and then to symptoms of REDs, DE behaviours or EDs.’°'*! a]
factors. This is of concern, especially for young athletes, due to poten- 8
Unfortunately, the measurement of EA in free-living athletes tially long-lasting negative physical and psychological outcomes. ©
is challenged by a high level of burden (eg, time, effort) to the Thus, body composition assessment is recommended only for 5
participant and assessor. Also, protocols to undertake EA assess- medical purposes under 18 years of age”® '? '5 (see figure 4). .
ments or EA-based diet prescription will continue to be chal- Exceptional circumstances may exist where body composition 9
lenged by the errors associated with accurately measuring El, assessment may be justified for athletes <18 years. Still, such s
EEE and other contributing components (eg, FFM, resting meta- a decision warrants careful consideration and consensus among oe
bolic rate (RMR)),*” *’ '”? but these can be better managed in the athletes’ health and performance team and requires guardian =~
the future by implementing a standardised approach. Protocols consent. =
p= ®
1080 Mountjoy M, et a/. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073-1098. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 ay
>

o
Consensus statement 2
2s
Many sports have engrained cultures where coaches and and the possible negative health effects consequent to inappro- g
members of the athlete health and performance team exert subtle priate assessment and (3) have inadequate communication skills, a
to extreme pressure on athletes to regulate body weight and with lack of optimised protocols on how to manage and safely =
composition. '*! '** Unfortunately, many members of the athlete implement the data to promote health and performance without io
entourage appear to (1) lack the knowledge of safe regulation the added risk of developing REDs, DE behaviours or EDs. >
of body weight and composition and how it can be utilised to In some instances, erroneous and intensive body composition S|
improve performance while maintaining health; (2) have igno- measurement could lead to allegations of harassment and abuse S
rance of the suitability of various body composition methods by athletes.'*? ** It is important, therefore, to identify valid and o
®
a
o
EE o
2 5 —
Table 3 Potential REDs performance outcomes that can result from problematic LEA f=)
Pe ee ee ae ee eee eee eee on
Athletic populations with LEA (assessed directly or via surrogates) providing bad
Spoke Examples of direct or indirect impairment evidence of impairment Q
Decreased athlete Increase in training days lost or modified due to illness or injury (eg, impaired preparation) Tier 4* FA (n=85) and MA (n=47) Olympic athletes from 11 different sports’? 3
availability (illness and Tier 4 FA (n=55) and MA (n=26) Olympic athletes from 11 different sports? 3
injury) Tier 4 FA endurance athletes (n=45)?"" gS
Tier 4 FA endurance athletes (n=13)’4 g
Tier 3 FA college athletes (n=116) from endurance, power and team sports2”> &
Unspecified Tier FA high-school athletes (n=163) from endurance, power and team 8
sports?7° Y
Unspecified Tier FA high-school athletes (n=249) from aesthetic, endurance and team =
207 S
sports D
Amix of Tier 1-4 FA (n=833)?”" i
Tier 2 FA figure skaters (n=137)?”* &
°
=
Tier 4 FA endurance athletes (n=13)"”“Unspecified Tier FA high school athletes ® S
(n=163) from endurance, power and team sports?”° on
50
8S
o
C3
omeg
3 @
aN)
Inability to compete at key competitions due to illness or injury 2S
Decreased training Decreased rather than increased performance of treadmill protocol following 4 weeks _Tier 2 club level FA endurance runners (n=16)"" 30
response intensified training plus 2 weeks recovery So
Ro
“3
US
Reduced performance of 5 km on-water rowing following a period of intensified training 36
Tier 4 national level MA (n=5) and FA rowers (n=5)?”° ee
90
Reduced swimming velocity in 400m time trial after 12 weeks of training go
Tier 3 junior national level FA swimmers (n=10)'® = 3
<3
Self-reported reduction in training response o>
Unspecified mixed tier FA (n=1000)* Se
ge
Decreased aerobic (4000 m time trial) and anaerobic (15s) performance after 2 weeks as
intensified training including inadequate energy intake Tier 3 MA road cyclists (n=13)'°° ao
Decreased recovery Direct: self-reported failure to recover between training sessions Tier 4 FA (n=8) and MA (n=4) lightweight rowers’® z
3.
Indirect: reduced glycogen synthesis Tier 3 MA endurance runners (n=7)"® 8
Tier 1 MA (n=6) and FA (n=7) endurance athletes?*' 3
=
°
—
Unspecified tier resistance-trained FA (n=7) and MA (n=8)"5” Pd
Indirect: reduced muscle protein synthesis 9
o
Tier 2 FA (n=19) endurance athletes?®? 3
Indirect: reduced PCr recovery =
Decreased cognitive Reduced reaction time Tier 4 FA endurance athletes (n=30)'* =
performance/skill Self-reported impaired judgement and decreased coordination and concentration Unspecified tier FA (n=1000)* i)
Decreased motivation Decreased well-being Tier 3 MA endurance athletes (n=18)”” ND
Increase in total mood disturbance (eg, fatigue, vigour) Tier 4 national level MA (n=5) and FA rowers (n=5)”? Ss
Self-reported increase in irritability and depression Unspecified tier FA (n=1000)* &
Emotional lability Tier 2-4 Mix of sports FA (n=8)°” 2
Increased irritability Tier 3 Endurance FA (n=10) and MA (n=2)” el
Increase in total mood disturbance and general stress Tier 3 MA Road cyclists (n=13)!° oy
Self-reported decrease in mood, emotional self-regulation, concentration, social Tier 4 FA (n=8) and MA (n=4) lightweight rowers”® FY
interaction, food anxiety 0)
Decreased muscle strength Decreased neuromuscular strength er 4 FA endurance athletes (n=30)'™ &
Decreased explosive power (countermovement jump) Tier 3 MA endurance athletes (n=18)”° oO
Decreased explosive power (countermovement jump, reactive jump) Tier 2-3 MA bodybuilder (n=1)?*" on
Decreased concentric hamstring peak torque Tier 2 junior elite FA cross country skiers (n=19)° S
Decreased isometric bench press Tier 2-3 MA bodybuilder (n=1)® oO
Decreased one rep max squat, bench press, deadlift Tier 2-3 FA fitness competitors (n=27)'®* s
Decreased concentric and eccentric peak force Tier 2-3 MA bodybuilder (n=1)?"* :
Tier 2-3 FA physique athlete (n=1)? =
Continued a
e
Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 1081 ay
7

o
Consensus statement z
2)
8
Table 3 Continued Fs
Athletic populations with LEA (assessed directly or via surrogates) providing =
Spoke Examples of direct or indirect impairment evidence of impairment oi
Decreased endurance Decreased performance of treadmill run protocol Tier 2 club level FA endurance runners (n=16)”" =
performance Reduced 5km on-water rowing performance Tier 4 national level MA (n=5) and FA rowers (n=5)?”? B
Decreased neuromuscular endurance Tier 4 FA endurance athletes (n=30)'* be)
Self-reported reduction in endurance performance Unspecified Tier FA athletes (n=1000)* =
=
m4
®
a
o
Decreased VO, ,.,, Tier 34 FA endurance athletes (n=33)"* o
Tier 3 MA road cyclists (n=50)'® Ss
Tier 3 MA road cyclists (n=13)'°° 2
3
Tier 4 FA (n=8) and M (n=4) lightweight rowers’® =
Apparent underperformance in 60 min functional power threshold vs training load a
Decreased performance of 4000 m time trial 3
Self-reported decrease in rowing performance a
Decreased power Reduced velocity during 400m swim time trial Tier 3 junior national level FA swimmers (n=10)'® ‘a
performance Decreased anaerobic (Wingate) performance Tier 2-3 MA bodybuilder (n=1)°° 3
Decreased number of throws in a Judo Specific Fitness Test Tier 2 MA second and third Dan black belt Judo athletes (n=11)' NN
Decreased performance of 15s cycling sprint Tier 3 MA road cyclists (n=13)!% Ay
Each outcome can occur in the absence of LEA; therefore a differential diagnosis should always be considered in the assessment of REDs severity and/or risk. 8
*Tiering system according to McKay et al.*" Oo
FA, female athlete; MA, male athlete; PCr, phosphorylated creatine; VO, max, maximal oxygen consumption. 2
°
=
reliable body composition assessment methods and develop clear included) and brightness-mode (B-mode) ultrasound (uncom- 2 i
guidelines on how to interpret, manage, and communicate safely pressed) method demonstrating good accuracy and sensitivity, $ ig
to athletic populations.” especially for lean individuals.'?’ Though costlier, DXA isa 8%
Choosing an appropriate body composition assessment reliable method for assessing BMD and estimating fat and lean ee
method involves consideration of its accuracy, repeatability, masses, provided standard test protocols are used.'*"* In 3 ®
utility and cost. Some easy-to-use methods are ‘doubly indirect’, summary, using skinfolds, DXA, and B-mode ultrasound are the BE S
relying on regression equations to derive a body fat per cent; proposed body composition assessment methods available at the 9
they do not provide valid data, use spurious assumptions and/ time of publication. For para athletes, adjustments of the assess-
or are influenced greatly by athlete presentation (eg, hydra- ment protocol and analysis of results may be needed. If that is *Q
tion levels).'°° Conversely, with operator training and sampling impossible, the assessment should not proceed. ve

f : P : na . a 5 . 3
several sites, reliable assessments of subcutaneous adipose tissue To minimise the risk of problematic LEA and DE behaviours, ¢ 8
thicknesses can be obtained via skinfolds (compressed and skin assessment of body mass and body composition is best conducted 2 &
om
eas)
<3
oa
Body system 3g
3.5
oKon
STEP 2: Idontly the charactorisics ofthe LEA STEP 3: Identiy moderating factors that might alter the eects of a0
a
STEP + nt tm opocicinpaimers thea or patemnancs by wich bis body saa night. 3
Characteristics Moderating factors be perturbed by LEA. This stop should algo include noting the criterion tests used to assess health 5
of LEA exposure ee em and pertormance, and potential diferential diagnoses ~ causes other than LEA 8
Senet isonids) eae Srolanaton Health outcomes Performance outcomes =
* Duration °
+ Consistency © Spade heslh culeana irc peor lec 3
+ atin Cay Engy Balance iia Seni Sete eat poate rates one S
diratontrevensy) Past medica nat o
Nanaia tuenotenon seieonn 3
Lon sestoxerone (nal) Exclnation >
oharacteriatics 3
sow ei eS
Say — [eee ——— &
‘nutritional [Carbohydrate availability iS}
*
oy
a
Criterion tests to assess _ aS]

; Criterion tests to assess

eee performance outcomes 8
©
SSTEP 4: Wnty te mecharismelastocintons between Cc
Color ad he sen cf tek ot the dcton (ove or ©
8
Figure 3 Integrated template of a clinical Physiological Model to show how problematic LEA ‘exposure’, with various associated moderating 9
factors, can lead to various REDs ‘outcomes’, as represented by body system/health dysfunction(s) and potential performance impairment(s). This a
template outlines four steps to adapt and update the model as the future science of LEA/REDs evolves. Examples of moderating factors are also =~
provided (step 3). LEA, low energy availability; REDs, Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport. =
es D
1082 Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 ay
a

wo

Consensus statement 2

wn

undergone internal expert voting statement validation (see 8

online supplemental files 2-4) and external REDs expert clinical a

cross-agreement validation.> =

The IOC REDs CAT2 consists of a three-step process io

aaa A neapecacoep Advanced (figure 5): Step 1: implementation of population-specific vali- a
assessmentw/ periodized dated REDs Screening Questionnaire(s) and/or clinical inter- 3

approach only with mature : ; oe Us Se : : 2

athletes with positive self-body image views, which are less sensitive and objective but inexpensive a

National Collegiate nena Developing and easy to implement for the initial identification of athletes at o
level Composition Concepts risk; Step 2: implementation of the IOC REDs CAT2 Severity/ 2
Ugo la fel cate peace ni Risk Assessment (tables 4 and 5) and Stratification with Sport 2

avsiosi Sn - Participation Guidelines (figure 6). These tools are based on 2
eens Emerging Body Composition Assessment Concepts ashore accumulating various primary and secondary risk indicators (eg, re

No body compositionassessments (other than for optimal growth : OE ¢ . é =

Progressions) and no focus on body composition for performance outcomes biomarkers, BMD, injury history (tables 4 and 5), resulting in @

the stratification of an athlete’s severity and risk as either green, 2

on ellow, orange or red light; and Step 3: an expert physician diag- cy

Athlete development Nutritional = Y° 0% Ofane B06 epic an-expertip ay! 8 3
- nosis including a treatment plan ideally integrating a collabora- S

stage skills : her ee! a
tive multidisciplinary team (see Definitions box 2). Ke

Figure 4 A conceptual framework on the implementation of The 10c REDs CAT2 introduces a four-colour traffic-light 8
body composition assessments (eg, height, weight, anthropometrics, severity/risk categorisation, in contrast to the three-colour strat- °
skinfolds) within the context of athlete stage of development and their ification in the 2015 RED-S CAT, due toi the appreciation 8
nutritional preparation skills’? (reprinted with permission from BJSM). that the 2015 yellow zone had an extensive clinical severity/risk Fe
range of very low (a few minor symptoms) to very high (a few a

. : indicators away from removal from sport). Furthermore, each 3

by the athlete health and performance team who are trained in REDs traffic-light outcome is associated with varying severity) & 8
the specific methods and are Competcneto SUPPOrt the athlete risk and sport participation recommendations (figure 6), ranging 2
and coach a making informed health first-performance second from full participation in training and competition (green) to 8 &
decisions relating to body COMIPOSIOn manipulation. This continued monitoring (yellow) to intensive medical inter- © 3
should include prescreening to assess body Image concerns and ventions and monitoring (orange) all the way to full medical g§ ®
problematic eaerng behaviours, as well as implementing appro- support coupled with consideration for removal from compe- X
priate dietary interventions and subsequent athlete monitoring. tition and training (red). The IOC REDs CAT2 also provides a8
Finally, body composivon data ate considered health data 4 more concrete scientific framework and, where scientifically BO
and must be kept confidential with appropriate levels of data supported, a scoring system identified for each indicator. It is #2
protection. Accordingly, each body composition assessment and important to note that despite diagnostic progress, there is no 3B 3
outcome report requires athlete informed consent and should singular validated diagnostic method for REDs, as the syndrome 3 8
only be shared with those the athlete authorises to be privy to has a complex mosaic of signs and symptoms, necessitating the ao
the results. exclusion of other potential aetiologies in the differential diag- & =
nosis for each REDs indicator. Over time, the [OC REDs CAT2 gz 3

IOC REDs Clinical Assessment Tool-Version 2 (IOC REDs CAT2) bane i a = = in scientific knowledge and 8 =z
Significant scientific progress in REDs severity and risk assess- ee dback Irom Widespread ULIsAHOns as
ment has been made since the original IOC REDs Clinical Assess- . Pace
ment Tool (CAT) was published in 2015.'*' Because problematic Prevention and treatment of REDs z
LEA is the underlying aetiology for the health and performance _ Primary and secondary prevention of REDs 3
outcomes of REDs, various LEA indicators (signs and symptoms) Primary prevention includes tackling inadequate awareness and 3
have emerged as the current best practice for clinical assessment knowledge of the health and petformaiice. sequelae of REDs 2
and research purposes. These indicators underpin the new IOC and sports nutriion ae ong athletes’ and their entou- g
REDs CAT2”> (figures 5 and 6, and tables 4 and 5), which has _ tage (eg, coaches, parents, athlete health and performance =
2

©

3

Step1 Step2 Step3 @

REDs Screening REDs Severity/Risk Assessment. REDs Clinical Diagnosis and Treatment =
(Population-specific Questionnaires or + High sensitivity + Physician diagnosis based on oS

Clinical Interview) + More expensive information from Steps 1 and 2 along ND

+ Lower sensitivity and specificity + Clear scoring allows for easy and with clinical history and examination, oO

+ Inexpensive and easy to use reliable implementation + Individualized treatment plan nN

+ Questionnaires allow for large athlete implemented by the multi-disciplinary »

group screening greater than low yellow, orange, athlete health and performance team au

Tisk proceeds to or red to proceed a)

step 2 to Step 3 @

, » Ras! :

SP) S

oe

Figure 5 The IOC REDs CAT2 three-step protocol including: Step (1) screening; Step (2) severity and risk assessment and stratification; and Step (3) =~
clinical diagnosis and treatment. CAT, Clinical Assessment Tool; IOC, International Olympic Committee; REDs: Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport. =
yp" ®
Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 1083 ay
7

o
Consensus statement z
wn
3
3
a
on
=
ON“ EEE ®
a
GREEN + ORANGE+ REDt+ =
Severity/Risk Severity/Risk Severity/Risk 3
None to very low Moderate to High Very High/Extreme ce}
=
ism
eee Cie Clinical Criteria Clinical Criteria a
< 1 secondary indicato primary & 22 secondary indicators OR 24 primary 2
Treatment, Training & 3 primary & <1 secondary indicator 5
Competition Recommendations Treatment, Training & ‘ 7)
* No treatment required Treatment, Training & eo oipetition Recommendations =]
+ Full training and competition Competition Recommendations (¢ hospitalisation) required by =
clearance + Treatment, close monitoring frequent monitoring at ~daily to a
and follow-up required monthly intervals depending on a
(eg., ~monthly), severity c
RH
Bone azpecis of training and! + Significant training and competition oO
Bray need tbe modifications required, and in the 3
modified majority of cases, removal from all 5
training and competition is indicated @
DS)
+ Serious media incor of REDs andlor EDs equrng immediate medal ation, gotta hosptalzatn and oval fom raining and competion (lease se lable 2) incu: < 75% median BMI er age and sx Electohte dsurbences; ECG 8
Sinormaiis (29, proanged Oe nena or sever radar (ad Hf = 30 tym’ Acelescan HR = 45 9pm), Severe hypotension soN4> ig: Onostatlarance (atu @ Adolescent a supine fo tandng systole B crop» 20 mii anda 8
Gato op» tb ng) Faire of eupatont 9 eaten prgrarm Ace meal conpicatone of malnton; Ary canton on tat rs medal teatrent and monn wie ang andor corretng i
8
Figure 6 IOC REDs CAT2 Severity/Risk stratification with sport participation guidelines implementing the associated IOC REDs Severity/Risk Ka
Assessment tool (see table 4), with varying clinical management recommendations. Please see online supplemental file 5 for the IOC REDs CAT2 =
scoring tool. Disclaimer: these guidelines are not to be used in isolation and are not to be solely used for diagnosis. Furthermore, these guidelines are =)
less reliable when it is impossible to assess all indicators in table 4. These guidelines are not a substitute for professional clinical diagnosis, advice 28
and/or treatment from a team of REDs health and performance experts led by a physician. along with the evaluation of health status presented here, Qo
Severity/Risk stratification and sport participation decisions need to be made in the context of various decision modifiers, such as performance level of 9 3
the athlete, sport type, participation risk, conflict of interest, athlete/coach pressures, timing and season.”°° c3
bpm, beats per minute; BMI, body mass index; bp, blood pressure; ECG, electrocardiogram; EDs, eating disorders; HR, heart rate; REDs, Relative Energy s 3
Deficiency in Sport. <n
28
30

ey
is)
*
team).'? 148 1° For example, less than half of coaches and well-controlled dietary and/or exercise intervention studies of pS
physicians surveyed were able to identify the three components REDs are needed, but numerous practical and methodological S Q
of the female athlete triad'*” 4° °° '%'; other studies reported challenges exist. Indeed, in the one intention-to-treat 12-month, ag
similar knowledge gaps among physiotherapists and athletic randomised controlled clinical trial that implemented dietary a=
trainers.'*? '#5 Short-term education programmes, using various changes to increase EI in exercising females with REDs-related 23
delivery methods and focusing on factors associated with EDs, biomarkers, there was a high drop-out rate (57%), and improve- 8 =
DE behaviours, and REDs have been shown to improve nutri- ment in some (eg, menstrual function resumption in select es
tional knowledge and reduce signs of dieting and body image participants),'°! but not all symptoms (eg, inability to retard es
Fi . 70 152-158 ~) 162 a: aor : ‘ ao
concerns in female and male athletes. Furthermore, bone loss)."°" Such findings may indicate that optimal dietary 3
early identification of symptoms using screening instruments, interventions are not yet identified, dietary changes are diffi- s
individual health interviews and objective assessment of REDs cult to accept or implement, various REDs sequelae improve at =
biomarkers may be useful as secondary prevention.*> However, different rates, the dose of LEA may influence time to recovery, s
the REDs education and behaviour modification research field or a combination of these and other factors. =
is underdeveloped, and specific REDs education programmes There are some useful pharmacological and psychological s
targeting athletes and other key personnel require further explo- approaches emerging to treat clinical issues associated with é
ration and validation.” REDs.”” One example is 17f-oestradiol transdermal patch ©
continuously with cyclic oral micronised progesterone admin- 3
Treatment (tertiary prevention) principles of REDs istration, which demonstrated increased BMD Z-scores at the g
Clinical treatment of diagnosed REDs cases (risk stratified in the spine (2.75%), femoral neck (5.25%) and total hip (1.85%) i)
yellow, orange and red light) should prevent further long-term at the end of a 12-month intervention in oligo-amenorrhoeic N
health and performance sequelae,” sometimes requiring adju- endurance athletes; those randomised to combined oral contra- 2
vant treatment of body system dysfunction(s) (eg, low BMD, GI ceptive pills (ethinyl oestradiol and desogestrel) or no treatment 2
dysfunction, depression (see figures 1 and 2)) while reversing had inferior BMD results.'® Uv
problematic LEA and its various underpinning causes.” The A comprehensive team approach of the athlete health and 8
primary approach to treating REDs should be a restoration of | performance team, including sports medicine, nutrition, ©
optimal EA via non-pharmacological approaches, including psychology and sports science personnel, together with coach &
changes to diet and exercise to achieve sustained optimal and family engagement is recommended. The team approach is e
EA with appropriate contributions of macronutrients and especially important in athletes with severe REDs stemming from S
micronutrients.!*” DE behaviours or EDs.”” * '°* Treatment goals should ensure 9S
Studies of LEA exposure have identified a somewhat more safe sport participation while undergoing long-term treatment ©
prominent effect of poor EI, rather than excessive EEE, in and monitoring, including risk stratification to assess the safety =~
causing most of the physiological perturbations. '”’ '®° Long-term, of continued sports participation. =
es D
1084 Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 ay
a

wo
Consensus statement @
2s
Table 4 10C REDs CAT2 Severity/Risk Assessment tool that Table 4 Continued Fs
implements primary, secondary and potential indicators into a traffic- CEST =
light criterion outlined in figure 6 SY, ________§_ i oi
———————OEOEOE——eeeeeoeeeeeereoereororeo3W“o rieVr_rweoewy Every indicator above requires consideration of a non-LEA-mediated differential diagnosis. oa
REDs indicator References All indicators apply to females and males unless indicated. Menstrual cycle status and =
Severe primary indicators (count as 2 primary indicators) endogenous sex hormone levels cannot be accurately assessed in athletes who are taking a
7 Pp y - pl y — ee sex hormone-altering medications (eg, hormone-based contraceptives), and thyroid a
Primary amenorrhoea (females: primary amenorrhoea is indicated hormone status indicators cannot be accurately assessed in athletes who are taking thyroid ed
when there has been a failure to menstruate by age 15 in the medications. All laboratory values should be interpreted in the context of age-appropriate a
presence of normal secondary sexual development (two SD above the and sex-appropriate and laboratory-specific reference ranges. Most REDs data and i
mean of 13 years), or within 5 years after breast development if that associated thresholds have been established in premenopausal/andropausal adults unless Qa
occurs before age 10); or prolonged secondary amenorrhoea (absence indicated. Disclaimer: this tool should not be used in isolation nor solely for diagnosis, as S
of 12 or more consecutive menstrual cycles) due to FHA every indicator requires clinical consideration of a non-LEA-mediated differential diagnosis. a
Clinically low free or total testosterone (males: below the reference £22 12! 289-291 Furthermore, the tool is less reliable in situations where it is impossible to assess all o
range) indicators (eg, menstrual cycle status in females who are using hormonal contraception). =
ug — This tool is not a substitute for professional clinical diagnosis, advice and/or treatment from @
Primary indicators a physician-led team of REDs health and performance experts 2
Secondary amenorrhoea (females: absence of 3-11 consecutive CR Adolescent refers to <18 years of age. 3
menstrual cycles) caused by FHA *BMD assessed via DXA within <6 months. In some situations, using a Z-score from another 3
Subclinically low total or free testosterone (males: within the lowest ©2252 2-1 skeletal site may be warranted (eg, distal 1/3 radius when other sites cannot be measured or 5
s 4 f the ref ° including proximal femoral measurements in some older (>15 years) adolescents for whom Q
25% (quartile) of the reference range) longitudinal BMD monitoring into adulthood is indicated).''?"" A true BMD decrease (from by
Subclinically or clinically low total or free T3 (within or below the 4021920) prior testing) is ideally assessed in comparison to the individual facilities DXA’s LSC based I)
lowest 25% (quartile) of the reference range) on the facilities calculated coefficient of variation (%CV). As established by ISCD, at the very 2
History of =1 high-tisk (femoral neck, sacrum, pelvis) or >2 low-risk 706286222 least, LSC sould 92 32%, 5.0% and 6.9% for the spine, hip and femoral neck to detect a S
BSI (all other BSI locations) within the previous 2 years or absence of elite EMG . tee " S
ls te ‘tPotential indicators are purposefully vague in quantification, pending further research to oO
26 months from training due to BSI in the previous 2 years antify parameters and cut-offs more accuratel B
i fanaleS ana Tish Id: ecorat 119 120 123 293 q Gao i aunee °
Pre-menopausal females and males <50 years old: BMD Z-score BMD, bone mineral density; BMI, body mass index; BP, blood pressure; BSI, bone stress Ss
<-1 at the lumbar spine, total hip or femoral neck or decrease in injuries; DSM-5-TR, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition, oN
BMD Z-score from prior testing text revision; DXA, dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry; EDE-Q, Eating Disorder Examination fom
Children/adolescents: BMD Z-score* <—1 at the lumbar spine or TBLH Questionnaire; FFM, fat-free mass; FHA, functional hypothalamic amenorrhoea; Gl, 9 @
or decrease in BMD Z-score from prior testing (can occur from bone gastrointestinal; HR, heart rate; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor 1; ISCD, International folne]
loss or inadequate bone accrual) Society for Clinical Densitometry; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LSC, least significant change; rm oO
A negative deviation of a paediatric or adolescent athlete's previous 2225 RMR, resting metabolic rate; T3, triiodothyronine; T, testosterone; TBLH, total body less head. = 3
growth trajectory (height and/or weight) E 2
An elevated score for the EDE-Q global (>2.30 in females; >1.68 in °° 89276 286-298 PA s
males) and/or clinically diagnosed DSM-5-TR-defined Eating Disorder REDs research methodology guidelines . 2 Ss
(only one primary indicator for either or both outcomes) Although the seminal REDs research implemented randomised oo
Secondary indicators clinical trials with strict laboratory-controlled EA interventions in 1S 9
. 5125 12: ‘i :
Oligomenorrhoea caused by FHA (>35 days between periods fora © 41 8687 habitually sedentary females, most of the research U 5
maximum of 8 periods/year) since has involved cross-sectional study designs investigating the 9 9
History of 1 low-risk BSI (see high vs low-risk definition above) within 7°82 prevalence of various LEA indicators (indirectly via question- 3 e
ES revels 2 yon and absence of <6 months from training due to naires or directly via indicators).* 11 21 49 78 166 167 While results g o
in the previous 2 years . ‘ ae ‘
E u BEES have confirmed the aetiology of REDs is problematic LEA, find- oS
ve tate On LDU Coles tera (cue elctelice aie) ings also show significant individualised responses concerning the ‘o 3
Clinically diagnosed depression and/or anxiety (only one secondary 796 30030! 8 I 8 dvs . Pthed . i SOR GAT : 7 8 =
indicator for either or both outcomes) RYDE, DECVa ence an : seventy of Ee py aimments pi vanous body 6 28
Potential indicators (nut scorediemerdine) tt systems associated with this exposure, as well as a lack & =
Subclinically or clinically low IGF-1 (within or below the lowest 25% "1 19629 ~ g
(quartile) of the reference range) >
ini 1180 5 as A
Clinically low blood glucose (below the reference range) Table 5 Serious medical indicators of REDs and/or EDS requiring 2
ini Teli 45 127290 i A 4 : ae
Clinically low blood insulin (below the reference range) immediate medical attention, potential hospitalisation and g
Chronically poor or sudden decline in iron studies (eg, ferritin, iron, "6°30? 30% removal from training and competition (adapted from ED clinical =
transferrin) and/or haemoglobin t dati diatri d adult ED d S
: — = = 38705307 management recommendations, paediatric ana aqu' Papers an
Lack of ovulation (via urinary ovulation detection) athlete cardiovascular health consensus papers. 294 295 313 315 316 322 323 Zz
ir i i i 45 127 179.290 2 2
reed SE (chove the tefefefice Disclaimer: this list should not be used in isolation and should be 3
——— 30308 308 based on a thorough clinical assessment that considers the severity of 3
Urinary incontinence (females) Hhenth ioe a ohisicalend tal health ®
Gl or liver dysfunction/adverse GI symptoms at rest and during 0 MSU AIA UCT CLR IRE LLU a
eercee Serious medical indicators 2
Reduced or low RMR <30 kcal/kg FFM/day or RMR ratio <0.90 pceatele > <75% median BMI for age and sex S
Reduced or low libido/sex drive (especially in males) and decreased '*""" > Electrolyte disturbances (eg, hypokalaemia, hyponatraemia, hypophosphataemia) nN
morning erections > ECG abnormalities (eg, prolonged QTc interval or severe bradycardia (adult: o
Symptomatic orthostatic hypotension ee HR<30 bpm; adolescent: HR<45 bpm)) Uv
Bradycardia (HR <40 in adult athletes; HR <50 in adolescent athletes) °°29°313 Pm Severe hypotension: $90/45mm Hg . . . 8
. ——— HSRC > Orthostatic intolerance (adult and adolescent: a supine to standing systolic BP D
Low systolic or diastolic BP (<90/60 mm Hg) i : oO
: ses drop>20mm Hg and a diastolic drop>10 mm Hg) Cc
Sleep disturbances > Failure of outpatient ED treatment programme 2
Psychological symptoms (eg, increased stress, anxiety, mood changes, °° 200201 318 > Acute medical complications of malnutrition (eg, syncope, seizures, cardiac a
body dissatisfaction and/or body dysmorphia) failure, pancreatitis) S
Exercise dependence/addiction ease > Any condition that inhibits medical treatment and monitoring while training and/ &
Low BMI ee or competing ©
Continued BMI, body mass index; BPM, beats per minute; ECG, electrocardiogram; ED, eating =~
disorder; HR, heart rate; QTc, corrected QT. i)
oc
pp oy
Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 1085 ay
S

o
no}
Box 2 Definitions - 1OC REDs-Clinical Assessment Tool-2 a
(10C REDs CAT2) =
along a spectrum characterised by a traffic light continuum from o
REDs CAT primary indicators healthy (green) to mild (yellow), to moderate (orange), to severe =
Outcome parameters most consistently resulting from (red), and provides sport participation guidelines for each level. «
problematic LEA leading to REDs signs and/or symptoms REDs diagnosis 2
identified in the scientific literature and/or with the greatest Maia Taek GE REDE reculte rome clinical aececamment by a a
measurement validity (ie, sensitivity, specificity) and/or indicative hi agNOsIe h ise in REDs, using inf . i “ Pa
of increased severity and risk of REDs. Accordingly, these 4 ysician a a eid ain i Geis a
indicators hold the most evidence and impact in the overall IOC ele pee Copa ae Spas ae Physician, ®
REDs CAT2 Severity/Risk Assessment and Stratification Tool. eel SGI Seas NS belenavelts Psycho taal ; 3
psychiatrist), which ideally includes: (1) appropriately validated are
REDs CAT secondary indicators questionnaires and/or clinical interview; (2) physical assessment; @
Outcome parameters with some scientific evidence, resulting and (3) laboratory and imaging data as indicated in the IOC Ss
from problematic LEA leading to REDs signs and/or symptoms REDs Severity/Risk Assessment and Stratification Tool. A REDs g
identified in the scientific literature and/or with lower diagnosis is predicated on excluding other aetiologies in the gS
measurement validity (ie, sensitivity, specificity) and/or have differential diagnosis for each REDs indicator and ranges from 5
shown less severity and risk of REDs. Accordingly, these yellow to orange to red severity/risk. S
indicators hold a secondary level of evidence and impact i
in the overall |OC REDs CAT2 Severity/Risk Assessment and =
Stratification Tool. of a universal EA threshold below which problems are observed.** ‘J
REDs CAT potential indicators Cross-sectional studies are useful for clinical REDs assessment and Q
Emerging outcome parameters lacking robust scientific evidence prevalence, but an analysis of this literature reveals multiple limita- — @ x
but may possibly be linked to problematic LEA leading to REDs tions (eg, lack of a classification of subject calibre/training status; = on
signs and/or symptoms. These parameters generally demonstrate lack of a standardisation of recruitment and assessment protocols; a $
many of the following: poor characterisation of menstrual status and hormonal contra- =o
= poor and/or inconsistent evidence ceptive use; varied use of indicators of physiological, hormonal & s
= lack of existing validated screening tool, including a lack of and performance status; and poor or non-existent assessment of § 3
validated cut-offs or thresholds in athletes EA). It is noted that there are few prospective or cohort studiesin 2$
=> poor measurement validity (ie, sensitivity, specificity or high which groups of athletes with and without signs of LEA have been 3 od
variability) monitored longitudinally to note changes in health and perfor- Rg
=> high cost and/or poor global availability mance.!® °° Finally, there is also a need for controlled interven- DS
Accordingly, these indicators are listed as supportive in the tion studies in which EA manipulations are implemented with  g§ 9
Severity/Risk Assessment of REDs but are not directly involved in rigorous designs and careful assessment of the dose-response, 8 @
the IOC REDs CAT2 Severity/Risk Assessment and Stratification time-course and variability in the development of perturbations @ &
Tool. Potential indicators may move up to secondary or primary to body systems and functional impairments.“ °° °* 17° 17! By gs
designation or off any list, pending more research validity and/or the triangulation of data from these various approaches (cross- Qs
improved availability and/or cost. sectional/longitudinal/interventional studies), the complexity 3 €
of the relationship between LEA and REDs can be realised. Itis 25
REDs symptoms eo. recommended that future REDs research be conducted using stan- 3 @
Any REDs primalys secondary or potential indicator parameter(s) dardised methodology to provide more accurate insights and to z
that an athlete directly reports or experiences (eg, pain from a facilitate cross-study comparisons?! 3
BSI, amenorthoea, depression, hunger, low libido, performance Table 6 summarises methods that are considered to be preferred 8
and training plateaus or declines) in the IOC REDs CAT2 Severity/ techniques for assessing health and performance outcomes asso- =)
Risk Assessment and Stratification Tool. ciated with REDs, as well as others that do not reach that crite- S
REDs signs rion but are commonly used and considered acceptable in terms z
Any REDs primary, secondary or potential indicator parameter(s) of validity (ie, variability and precision) and feasibility (eg, avail- <
that a clinician identifies on the IOC REDs CAT2 Severity/Risk ability, cost). Some tests have standards and diagnostic criteria 3
Assessment Tool. A REDs sign may also be a significant individual for what is considered ‘normal’ versus ‘impaired’. Meanwhile, 2
change in a primary, secondary or potential indicator from the the assessment of other features provides quantitative data that =
athlete's baseline within the context of REDs, with or without can be compared over time or between individuals and inter- w
athlete symptoms (eg, a significant change in sex hormones, preted with consideration of the known precision/errors of Ss
resting metabolic rate, cholesterol). Note: some indicators can be mmicasurement: a
both signs and symptoms (eg, amenorrhoea). z
10C REDs CAT2 Severity/Risk Assessment and Stratification CONCLUSION . 8
with Sport Participation Guidelines As evidenced by this consensus statement, there have been g
A clinical tool to assist with identifying the current severity and/ numerous scientific advances in the field of REDs since: the g
or the future risk of REDs that is comprised of an accumulation publication of the 2018 IOC consensus update statement’: from a
of primary and secondary indicators of REDs. The IOC REDs CAT2 new scientific concepts around our understanding of the evolu- S
Severity/Risk Stratification with Sport Participation Guidelines tion of various REDs signs and symptoms to the development 8
identifies the severity and/or risk of REDs for a given athlete of a Physiological Model. depicting the nuanced complexity of :
how LEA exposure (either problematic or adaptable), with asso- =~
Continued ciated moderating factors, leading to changes in health and/or =
1086 Mountjoy M, et a/. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073-1098. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 J

[es]

Consensus statement o.

wn

in Sn 0 Et tT i as >
Table 6 Methods (preferred, used and recommended, and potential) for studying various health and performance outcomes of REDs Fs
Health outcome Methods and notes =
Impaired reproductive function Preferred a
> Overnight sampling of LH and FSH** =

> Menstruating females: phase-based hormonal approach using urinary ovulation kits (testing mid-cycle LH surge) and blood sampling?” a

>  Postpubertal males: morning total and free testosterone level?” 225 oe

Used and recommended a

> Females: self-reported menstrual history, urinary ovulation testing,” 2?” LEAF-Q'”" isa

> Males: self-reported libido/morning erection (eg, LEAM-Q2”° or ADAM-Q'"' #8) an

Impaired bone health Preferred i
pean a

— Using age-appropriate and medically appropriate body-site scanning” o

= Using age-appropriate, sex-appropriate and activity-appropriate interpretation (eg, Z-score vs T-score) 2

Used and recommended 3

> Bone stress injury and fracture history os

Potential a

> HRpQCT 3

Impaired gastrointestinal function Preferred Roa
> Oesophageal motility: oesophageal manometry, barium swallow G

> GERD: upper endoscopy ES

> Gastric motility: electrogastrography’=" 2? a

> Gastroparesis: gastric emptying study Y:

> Pancreatitis: =2 of: (a) lipase >3x upper limit of normal; (b) imaging findings consistent with pancreatitis; (c) characteristic epigastric pain S

> Intestinal transit: radiopaque marker study, orocaecal transit time test??? w

> SMA syndrome: upper Gl oral contrasted study, MRI or CT?3°33® oe

Used and recommended =

> GERD: many questionnaires,” including GerdQ™” 8

> Constipation: Wexner Constipation Score,**" Bristol Stool Scale”? oO

> Diarhoea: Bristol Stool Scale” eS

> Irritable bowel syndrome: Rome IV Criteria” o

Elevated transaminases?“ *4° 3

> Defecatory disorders, faecal incontinence™®: Faecal Incontinence Questionnaire,° “” Faecal Incontinence Severity Index (FISI),"** Altomare’s on

Obstructed Defecation Scale (ODS) score’? o>

> Multiple GI symptoms: Rome II questionnaire?” g @

> Gl symptoms during exercise®" *? au

> LEAF-Q Gl subsection score =2 indicative of LEA?"*25? os

»  Athlete-specific GI symptom inventory?™* m3

> Feeding challenge during exercise®* 25> co

Potential o &

> Intestinal transit: wireless motility capsule = aN

> Gut bacterial profile 2S

> Faecal or plasma short-chain fatty acid concentration 30

Impaired energy metabolism/regulation Preferred WH
D>  Thytoid function tests: TSH, free T4, total and free T3' Roe

> Leptin: overnight sampling?®® “s

> Cortisol: overnight sampling,'”? 24-hour urinary free cortisol” DS

> Laboratory/expert-controlled measurements/estimates of all compartmentalised energetic intakes and total daily expenditures (exercise, non- 3g

exercise activity, basal metabolic rate, thermic effect of food)*** oa

Used and recommended 22

> Cortisol: morning serum cortisol, late-night salivary cortisol?” ag

> RMR: indirect calorimetry,”*? room calorimetry?" od

Impaired haematological status Preferred <3
> CBC with differential 8 z

> Iron studies (iron, ferritin, transferrin, total iron binding capacity) with age-appropriate, sex-appropriate and laboratory-appropriate cut-offs Bs

> Carbon monoxide haemoglobin mass measurement’®*** S.5

Used and recommended as

> Self-reported history of iron deficiency or anaemia ao

Potential =

>  App-based self-assessment” low

Urinary incontinence Preferred =
> Stress urinary incontinence: bladder stress test”? 8

> International Consultation on Incontinence-Urinary Incontinence Short Form (ICIQ-UI-SF)2°22" 3

> 3 Incontinence Questionnaire (310) S

Potential °

> Pelvic Floor Dysfunction-ScrEeNing Tool IN fEmale athLetes (PFD-SENTINEL)*> =

Impaired glucose and lipid metabolism Preferred S)
> Fasting blood glucose (serial measures) o

> Fasting insulin? 3

> Lipid panel: HDL, LDL, total cholesterol, triglycerides’** fog

Used and recommended @

> Continuous glucose monitor” ak

Mental health issues Preferred ad
> Clinical interview with psychiatrist or psychologist, DSM-5-TR°™ NO

Used and recommended Ss

> Depression: PHQ,*” Centre for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale,*”” Beck Depression Inventory” BSS

> Generalised anxiety: GAD-7,'°**” Dass-217°7 37374 o

D> Stress: Perceived Stress Scale?”® a

> Brunel Mood Scale”® =

> Profile of Mood States?””2”* g

> Eating disorders: EDE-Q,”"*" BEDA-Q,” Eating Disorder Inventory, ™” self-report 2

Impaired neurocognitive function Preferred Cc
> Clinical neuropsychological assessment D

Used and recommended oO

> Multiple domains: CogState assessment battery’ a

> Planning/cognitive flexibility: Wisconsin Card Sorting Test® So

> Attention: Stroop Colour and Word Test’ #8” Oo

> Decision making: lowa Gambling Test" ©

> Verbal memory: California Verbal Learning Test-1P° ©

> Executive function: Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System Color-Word Interference Test,?2* BRIEF-A™" =

Continued »

a

Mountjoy M, et al. BrJ Sports Med 2024;57:1073-1098. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 1087 ay
7

[es]
Consensus statement 2
wn
[ae >
Table 6 Continued Fs
Health outcome Methods and notes =
Sleep disturbances Preferred a
> Polysomnography" ah
Used and recommended” fa
> Research-grade actigraphy S|
> Sleep diaries <
> Numerous questionnaires, including Athlete Sleep Screening Questionnaire (ASSQ),2"” Athlete Sleep Behaviour Questionnaire (ASBQ),°* Epworth S
Sleepiness Scale, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index,'?**° insomnia Severity Index'**?3” a
Potential i
> Sport wearables*® a
Impaired cardiovascular function Preferred tH
> Conduction, rhythm abnormalities: ECG"? a
> Rate abnormalities: cardiac telemetry, Holter monitor f=)
> Haemodynamics: sphygmomanometery, orthostatic sphygmomanometery (220mm Hg drop in systolic pressure, 210mm Hg drop in diastolic a
pressure on standing from supine)""? * a
> Autonomic function: heart rate variability by Holter monitor,"°°*" baroreflex sensitivity testing, “” bedside tests (eg, Valsalva, tilt testing) fox)
> Structural abnormalities: transthoracic echocardiogram* fa
> Endothelial dysfunction: brachial artery flow-mediated dilatation”? “? a
Used and recommended Bo)
> Heart rate: chest-mounted electrode-containing heart rate strap" “°° gS
> Haemodynamics: self-reported episodes of orthostatic (pre-) syncope g
Potential DS)
> Sport wearables**? °° 8
Reduced skeletal muscle function Preferred 2
> Muscle protein synthesis: isotopic amino acid labelling,” deuterated water ingestion“°® “°° S
> Muscle glycogen content: histochemical analysis of biopsy-derived muscle samples,‘"? '°C-magnetic resonance spectroscopy‘® “"" o
Used and recommended F
> None-exclude assessment if unable to directly measure as above 4
Impaired growth and development Preferred Q
> Paediatric patients: clinical assessment with growth charts
= Deviation from baseline growth trajectory, defined as a dynamic change with time (vs a single measurement) as
= Decrease in growth Z-score by >12244"2 an
> Growth hormone: overnight sampling’? 50
> IGF-1:serum levels, IGFBP-3 levels‘"* rome’
Used and recommended o
> Paediatric patients: delayed markers of puberty (thelarche, menarche, spermarche) c 3
Reduced immunity Preferred 3 @
> Tobe determined en
Used and recommended ne
> Self-reported illness frequency!?27"4"5 gi
Potential wr
> CBC, with differential, immunoglobulin G glycome, leucocyte transcriptome and cytokine profile”? IN 9
Performance outcome Methods and notes U 5
pn eeeeess___s__7___ RS
Decreased athlete availability Preferred 38
> Self-reported days of training/competition lost or modified due to illness or injury'®2”* "6 8 e
Decreased training response Preferred go
> Longitudinal tracking of valid performance-related metric specific to athlete/sport (eg, sport-related time trial)'°*""7“" = 3}
Used and recommended 25
> Self-reported plateauing of ability/performance despite training progression"? o>
> Exercise lactate profile?" OF
> Lactate: RPE ratio’? es
> Catecholamine concentrations 3.5
ax
Decreased recovery Preferred Zo
> Tobe determined “Ss
Used and recommended x
> — Lab-based studies: 3
— Creatine phosphate system: *'P magnetic resonance spectroscopy”> =
Sei 4 A26 Q
— Exercise-induced muscle damage: muscle biopsy 8
>  Field-based studies: 3
— Questionnaires: Recovery-Stress Questionnaire (REST-Q),'°*” self-reported perceptions of recovery, Profile of Moods State (POMS),*”” Hooper =
MacKinnon Questionnaire’”* S
— Creatine kinase (total, muscle)" z
> Athlete's subjective report of readiness‘? o
Potential <
> Wearable/commercialised recovery/readiness algorithms’ g
Decreased cognitive performance/skill Preferred “4
> skill: sport-specific measures (eg, Loughborough Soccer Passing Test)??? s
Used and recommended =
> Reaction time: consider sport-specific tests*™* 2S
> Spatial awareness: mental rotation test™"' NX
Decreased drive/motivation Preferred iS)
> Tobe determined =
Used and recommended 2
> — Motivation: Behavioural Regulation in Sport Questionnaire (BRSQ),"° Psychological Need States in Sport-Scale (PNSS-S)""° Ba]
> Athlete Burnout Questionnaire (ABQ)*” D
>  Maslach Burnout Inventory*#® p
Decreased muscle strength Preferred oO
> Longitudinal tracking of valid performance-related metric specific to athlete/sport (eg, sport-related strength test, such as snatch or clean and jerk Cc
for weightlifting, or throw distance for shot put)" %
Used and recommended Be
> _ Isokinetic dynamometry“°“** o
> One repetition maximum, specific movement (eg, bench press)?“ &
Continued S
=
o
is)
a
1088 Mountjoy M, et a/. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073-1098. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 ay
7

[es]

Consensus statement o.
ee 2
Table 6 Continued a
Performance outcome Methods and notes =
Decreased endurance performance Preferred a
> Longitudinal tracking of valid performance-related metric specific to athlete/sport (eg, sport-related time-trial)'@24"7 =h

Used and recommended fa

> Laboratory-based VO, max testing (via indirect calorimetry)"* S|

> _ Laboratory-based lactate threshold testing" <.

> Multistage shuttle run” S

> Cycling ramp test“* g

Decreased power performance Preferred D
> Wingate test“? 2

Used and recommended tH

>  Counter-movement jump” a

> Standing broad jump" fo}

> Bosco test? a

*While various methods have been used clinically and in research settings, many have not been validated or used in athletes or specifically used to assess the effects of REDs. Therefore, this table proposes methods that have been used for o
‘outcomes of interest and that the authors recommend to date. Q
ADAM-Q, Androgen Deficiency in Ageing Males Questionnaire; BEDA-Q, Brief Eating Disorder in Athletes Questionnaire; BRIEF-A, Behaviour Rating Inventory of Executive Function—Adult Version; CBC, complete blood count; DASS-21, Depression Aon
Anxiety Stress Scale-21; DSM-5 TR, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders fifth edition, text revision; DXA, dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry; EDE-Q, Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire; FSH, follicle stimulating hormone; oO
GAD-7, General Anxiety Disorder-7; GERD, Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease; GerdQ, Gastro-oesophageal Reflux Disease Questionnaire; GI, gastrointestinal; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; HRpQCT, high-resolution peripheral quantitative computed mo]
tomography; IGF-1, Insulin-like growth factor 1; IGFBP-3, Insulin-like growth binding protein-3; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LEA, low energy availability; LEAF-Q, Low Energy Availability in Females Questionnaire; LH, luteinising hormone; PHQ, gS
Patient Health Questionnaire; RMR, Resting Metabolic Rate; RPE, rating of perceived exertion; SMA, superior mesenteric artery; T3, triiodothyronine; T4, thyroxine; TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone; VO, max, Maximal oxygen consumption. @
8

nN

°

an

performance outcomes in individual athletes. Our understanding Correction notice This article has been corrected since it published. Figure 6 has 8
of the outcomes of problematic LEA exposure causing REDs on been updated in the online version only and not in print. g
athlete mental health and in male athletes has also been further Twitter Margo Mountjoy @margo.mountjoy, Kathryn E Ackerman °
refined. @DrKateAckerman, Louise M Burke @LouiseMBurke, Anthony C Hackney &
In addition to the scientific advances, we have presented @AC_Hackney, Ida Aliisa Heikura @ldaHeikura, Anna Melin @AnnaMelin4, Trent oo

f ical clinical euideli f sine LEA Stellingwerff @TStellingwerff, Jorunn Kaiander Sundgot-Borgen @Jorunn_SB, on

a SuIMIMAaLy OF plachica)clnical Suleclines TOTAsscssing Monica Klungland Torstveit @MMonicakt and Evert Verhagen @Evertverhagen as
and for safe body composition measurement. We have also . os
. d th entific li h . d Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the International Olympic =|
Teviewed. te sclentine Jterature On, Ene prevention 2n Committee for prioritising and supporting athlete health, Bryan Holtzman, Margot oe
treatment of REDs and introduced an updated, validated Rodgers and Grace Saville for citation and editorial assistance and Joe DeLeo for 8 a!
IOC REDs CAT2 to aid in diagnosis and Severity/Risk graphic support. D s
Assessment. Finally, by providing standardised guidelines Contributors All authors were involved in the conception, drafting, voting, in- 30
for research methodology, we look forward to high-quality person discussion, revising and approval of the final manuscript prior to submission. So
REDs research outcomes in the future. Most importantly, MM was responsible for leading the consensus project and for coordinating the & 2
our work aims to stimulate action by sports organisations, consensus statement manuscript. AUJ represented the athlete's voice, and DMB a) 2
eek represented the coach’s voice. RB, UE and LE represented the International Olympic 25

sports scientists, and the athlete health and performance Committee's Medical and Scientific Department. oo
team to protect the health and well-being of the many . cag F ga
hl isk for developi hi d Funding The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any a=
at etesva TISK.tOnG evel oping tiisis ymarome:, funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors. gs
ee ge Competing interests MM is a Deputy Editor of the BJSM and a member of the ea

Aleit elation Jee UIUSRRNRNEHORLG DAGIORESEmELOEMeAE BJSM IPHP Editorial Board. KEA is a Deputy Editor of the BJSM and an Associate 3s
Wate ie faa Conde Ivers ity Wienaes EQTOOKE AGN OO! OF NIECICING: Editor of the BJSM IPHP. EV is an Associate Editor of the BJSM, an Associate Editor of é& =
2Games Grou liblernctional Olympic Committee, Lausanne, Switzerland the BJSM IPHP and Editor in Chief of BMJ Open Sports and Exercise Medicine. RB is Pace
3WWu Tsai Fe ‘i Athlete P y i dM dic | School B ion Gillean the IOC Medical and Scientific Director. LE is the IOC Head of Science Activities and “Ss
urTsal Pelma’e:Atn ete rogram, Malvald Medical. Seno}; Soston Cnllcrens an Editor of BJSM IPHP. UE is an IOC member and the Chair of the 1OC Medical and zs
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Scienti Hi 3
4 cientific Commission. =
Israel Cycling Academy, Tel Aviv, Israel . an , °
°Mary MacKillop Institute for Health Research, Australian Catholic University, Patient consent for publication Not applicable. S$
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia ; ; Ethics approval Not applicable. oy
Sports Medicine Center, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, The Hebrew University, < . . S
Jerusalem, Israel Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed. z
Exercise and Sport Science, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It 2
USA , . oe ; has not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have g
Canada Sport Institute Pacific, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada been peer-reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those 5
*Exercise Science, Physical & Health Education, University of Victoria, Victoria, British of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and s
Columbia, Canada ; ; responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content oS
Department of Sport Science - Swedish Olympic Committee Research Fellow, includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability <
Linnaeus University, Kalmar, Sweden ; of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, Ss
Department of Sport and Social Sciences, Norwegian School of Sports Sciences, terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error &
Oslo, Norway and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise. 2
"Department of Sport Medicine, Norwegian School of Sports Sciences Department ae)
of Sport and Social Sciences, Oslo, Norway ORCID iDs g
"Department of Sport Science and Physical Education, University of Agder, Margo Mountjoy http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8604-2014 2
Kristiansand, Norway Kathryn E Ackerman http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2626-7785 c
"International Olympic Committee Athlete's Committee, Lausanne, Switzerland Louise M Burke http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8866-5637 g
"Amsterdam Collaboration on Health & Safety in Sports, Department of Public Anthony C Hackney http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6607-1472 pe
and Occupational Health, Amsterdam Movement Science, Amsterdam UMC Locatie Ida Alisa Heikura http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1088-428X o
VUmc, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Anne Marte Pensgaard http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4690-9888 s
"Medical and Scientific Department, International Olympic Committee, Lausanne, Trent Stellingwerff http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4704-8250 S
Switzerland Jorunn Kaiander Sundgot-Borgen http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1149-0442 =
"Department of Ophthalmology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey Monica Klungland Torstveit http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2798-9675 ®
"8World Archery, Lausanne, Switzerland Evert Verhagen http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9227-8234 =
ps 2
Mountjoy M, et al. BrJ Sports Med 2024;57:1073-1098. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 1089 ay
7

Consensus statement 2
qe
wn

REFERENCES sub-group of the IOC consensus on REDs. Br J Sports Med bjsports-2023- 106932 8
1 Langbein RK, Martin D, Allen-Collinson J, et al. “"I'd got self-destruction down to a [Preprint] 2023. a
fine art": a qualitative exploration of relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S) in 28 Hackney AC, Ackerman KE. REDs Alert: Male Athletes Be Wary and Scientists Take =
endurance athletes”. J Sports Sci 2021;39:1555-64. Action! An editorial by a sub-group of the IOC consensus statement on Relative [)

2 Loucks AB. Energy balance and body composition in sports and exercise. J Sports Sci Energy Deficiency in Sport (REDs). Br J Sports Med [Preprint] 2023. =
2004;22:1-14. 29 Pensgaard AM, Sundgot-Borgen J, Edwards C, et a/. lintersection of mental health =

3 Areta JL, Taylor HL, Koehler K. Low energy availability: history, definition and issues and Relative Energy Deficiency in sport (REDs): a narrative review by a sub- a
evidence of its endocrine, metabolic and physiological effects in prospective studies group of the IOC Consensuson REDs. [Preprint] 2023. z

in females and males. Eur J Appl Physiol 2021;121:1-21. 30 Mountjoy ML, Ackerman KE, Bailey DM, et a/. Avoiding the ‘Reds card’. We all have gz

4 Loucks AB. Chapter 5: energy balance and energy availability. In: Maughan R, ed. a role in the mitigation of Reds in athletes. BJ Sports Med [Preprint] 2023. g

The encyclopaedia of sports medicine. New Jersey, USA: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 31 McKay AKA, StellingwerffT, Smith ES, et al. Defining training and performance 3
2013. caliber: a participant classification framework. Int J Sports Physiol Perform »
5 Mountjoy M, Sundgot-Borgen J, Burke L, ef a/. The IOC consensus statement: beyond 2022;17:317-31. 2
the female athlete triad-relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S). Br J Sports Med 32 Shirley MK, Longman DP, Elliott-Sale KJ, et al. Life history perspective on athletes 2
2014;48:491-7. with low energy availability. Sports Med 2022;52:1223-34. =

6 Mountjoy M, Sundgot-Borgen JK, Burke LM, et al. IOC consensus statement 33  Gadgil M, Bossert WH. Life historical consequences of natural selection. Am Nat 8

on relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S): 2018 update. Br J Sports Med 1970;104:1-24. oc
2018;52:687-97. 34 Stearns SC. The evolution of life histories. Oxford, NY: Oxford University Press, 1992. om

7 Condo D, Lohman R, Kelly M, et a/. Nutritional intake, sports nutrition knowledge 35. De Souza Mi, Strock NCA, Ricker EA, et al. The path towards progress: a critical 8
and energy availability in female Australian rules football players. Nutrients review to advance the science of the female and male athlete Triad and relative a
2019;11:971. energy deficiency in sport. Sports Med 2022;52:13-23. D>

8 Ackerman KE, Holtzman B, Cooper KM, et a/. Low energy availability surrogates 36 Lieberman DE. Exercised: why something we never evolved to do is healthy and 8
correlate with health and performance consequences of relative energy deficiency in rewarding. New York: Vintage Books, 2021. °
sport. Br J Sports Med 2019;53:628-33. 37. Stellingwerff T, Heikura IA, Meeusen R, et a/. Overtraining syndrome (OTS) and S

9 Staal S, Sjédin A, Fahrenholtz |, et al. Low RMR,.,.. as a Surrogate marker for energy relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S): shared pathways, symptoms and 3
deficiency, the choice of predictive equation vital for correctly identifying male and complexities. Sports Med 2021;51:2251-80. ©
female ballet dancers at risk. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018;28:412-8. 38 Thurber C, Dugas LR, Ocobock C, et a/. Extreme events reveal an alimentary limit on °

10 Drew M, Viahovich N, Hughes D, et a/. Prevalence of illness, poor mental health and sustained maximal human energy expenditure. Sci Adv 2019;5:eaaw0341. 2
sleep quality and low energy availability prior to the 2016 Summer Olympic Games. 39 Burke LM, Hawley JA. Swifter, higher, stronger: what's on the menu? Science ® s
Br J Sports Med 2018;52:47-53. 2018;362:781-7. on

11 Sygo J, Coates AM, Sesbreno E, et al. Prevalence of indicators of low energy 40 Heikura IA, StellingwerffT, Areta JL. Low energy availability in female athletes: from es
availability in elite female sprinters. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018;28:490-6. the lab to the field. Eur J Sport Sci 2022;22:709-19. oo

12. Jesus F, Castela |, Silva AM, et al. Risk of low energy availability among female and 41 Mujika |, Halson S, Burke LM, et al. An integrated, multifactorial approach to c 3
male elite runners competing at the 26th European cross-country championships. periodization for optimal performance in individual and team sports. Int J Sports Ry 3
Nutrients 2021;13:873. Physiol Perform 2018; 13:538-61. a ~

13 McCormack WP, Shoepe TC, LaBrie J, et a/. Bone mineral density, energy availability, 42. StellingwerffT. Case study: body composition periodization in an olympic-level 2S
and dietary restraint in collegiate cross-country runners and non-running controls. female middle-distance runner over a 9-year career. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 30
Eur J Appl Physiol 2019;119:1747-56. 2018;28:428-33. So

14 Keay N, Overseas A, Francis G. Indicators and correlates of low energy availability in 43. Fitch K, Bernstein SJ, Aguilar MD. The RAND/UCLA appropriateness method user's & 2

male and female dancers. BM Open Sport Exerc Med 2020;6:e000906. manual. Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corp, 2001 vs

15 Haeg TB, Olson EM, Skaggs K, ef al. Prevalence of female and male athlete triad risk 44 Hasson F; Keeney S, McKenna H. Research guidelines for the Delphi survey technique. =

factors in ultramarathon runners. Clin J Sport Med 2022;32:375-81. J Adv Nurs 2000;32:1008-15. cy 2
16 Monedero J, Duff C, Egan B. Dietary intakes and the risk of low energy availability 45 Loucks AB, Thuma JR. Luteinizing hormone Pulsatility is disrupted at a threshold e a
in male and female advanced and elite rock climbers. J Strength Cond Res of energy availability in regularly Menstruating women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab os
2023;37:e8-15. 2003;88:297-311. &: s
17 Lane AR, Hackney AC, Smith-Ryan A, et a/. Prevalence of low energy availability in 46. Koehler K, Hoerner NR, Gibbs JC, et a/. Low energy availability in exercising men is c=
competitively trained male endurance athletes. Medicina (Kaunas) 2019;55:665. associated with reduced leptin and insulin but not with changes in other metabolic AS] i
18 Keay N, Francis G, Hind K. Low energy availability assessed by a sport-specific hormones. J Sports Sci 2016;34:1921-9. SS
questionnaire and clinical interview indicative of bone health, endocrine profile 47 Papageorgiou M, Elliott-Sale KJ, Parsons A, et al. Effects of reduced energy $s
and cycling performance in competitive male cyclists. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med availability on bone metabolism in women and men. Bone 2017;105:191-9. 3
2018;4:e000424. 48 Kojima C, Ishibashi A, Tanabe Y, et a/. Muscle Glycogen content during endurance fon

19 Moris JM, Olendorff SA, Zajac CM, et al. Collegiate male athletes exhibit conditions training under low energy availability. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2020;52:187-95. Fs

of the male athlete triad. App! Physiol Nutr Metab 2022;47:328-36. 49 Heikura IA, Uusitalo ALT, StellingwerffT, et a/. Low energy availability is difficult 8

20 Lane AR, Hackney AC, Smith-Ryan AE, et a/. Energy availability and RED-S risk to assess but outcomes have large impact on bone injury rates in elite distance 3

factors in competitive, non-elite male endurance athletes. Trans! Med Exerc Prescr athletes. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018;28:403-11. o
2021;1:25-32. 50 Pardue A, Trexler ET, Sprod LK. Case study: unfavorable but transient physiological 3
21. Ackerman KE, RogersMA, HeikuralA, et a/. Methodology for studying relative energy changes during contest preparation in a drug-free male bodybuilder. Int J Sport Nutr S
deficiency in sport (REDs): a narrative review by a sub-group of the IOC consensus Exerc Metab 2017;27:550-9. <
on REDs. Br J Sports Med bjsports-2023-107359 [Preprint] 2023. 51 Hector AJ, Phillips SM. Protein recommendations for weight loss in elite athletes: g
22 Blazey P, Crossley KM, Ardern CL, et al. “It is time for consensus on ‘consensus a focus on body composition and performance. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab oa
statements’ Br J Sports Med 2022;56:306-7. 2018;28:170-7. g
23. Shrier |. Consensus statements that fail to recognise dissent are flawed by design: a 52 Hammond KM, Sale C, Fraser W, et al. Post-exercise carbohydrate and energy 3
narrative review with 10 suggested improvements. Br J Sports Med 2020. availability induce independent effects on Skeletal muscle cell signalling and bone 'S
24 Burke LM, Ackerman KE, Heikura I, et a/. Mapping the complexities of relative turnover: implications for training adaptation. J Physiol 2019;597:4779-96. S
energy deficiency in sport (REDs): development of a physiological model by a 53 Fensham NC, Heikura IA, McKay AKA, et a/. Short-term carbohydrate restriction &
subgroup of the IOC consensus on REDs. Br J Sports Med bjsports-2023- 107335 impairs bone formation at rest and during prolonged exercise to a greater degree Es
[Preprint] 2023. than low energy availability. J Bone Miner Res 2022;37:1915-25. vu
25. Stellingwerff 1, Mountjoy M, McCluskeyW, et al. The scientific rationale, development 54 McKay AKA, Peeling P, Pyne DB, et al. Six days of low carbohydrate, not energy g
and validation of the Internaional Olympic Committee Relative Energy Deficiency in availability, alters the iron and immune response to exercise in elite athletes. Med Sci 2
Sport Clinical Assessment Tool 2 (IOC REDs CAT2) - a review by a subgroup of the Sports Exerc 2022;54:377-87. Cc
!OC consensus on REDs. Br J Sports Med bjsports-2023-106914 [Preprint] 2023. 55. Hayashi N, Ishibashi A, Iwata A, et a/. Influence of an energy deficient and low QD
26 Mathisen T, Ackland TR, Burke LM, et a/. Best practice recommendations for body carbohydrate acute dietary manipulation on iron regulation in young females. Physiol 2
composition considerations in sport to reduce health and performance risks: a critical Rep 2022;10:e15351. Ss
review, original survey, and expert opinion by a subgroup of the IOC consensus on 56 Heikura lA, Burke LM, Hawley JA, et a/. A short-term ketogenic diet impairs markers of s
Relative Energy Deficiency in sport (REDs). Br J Sports Med bjsports-2023- 106812 bone health in response to exercise. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2019; 10:880:880.:. S
[Preprint] 2023. 57 McKay AKA, Peeling P, Pyne DB, et a/. Acute carbohydrate ingestion does not :

27 Torstveit MK, Ackerman KE, Constantini N, et a/. Primary, secondary, and tertiary influence the post-exercise iron-regulatory response in elite Keto-adapted race =

prevention of Relative Energy Deficiency in sport (REDs): a narrative review by a Walkers. J Sci Med Sport 2019;22:635-40. =

1090 Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 8
=

Consensus statement e
wn
58 Meeusen R, Duclos M, Foster C, et a/. Prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of 86 Schofield KL, Thorpe H, Sims ST. Feminist sociology confluences with sport science: 8
the overtraining syndrome: joint consensus statement of the European College of insights, contradictions, and silences in interviewing elite women athletes about low a
Sport Science and the American College of Sports Medicine. Med Sci Sports Exerc energy availability. J Sport Soc Issues 2022;46:223--46. =
2013;45:186-205. 87 Back M, Falkenstrém F, Gustafsson SA, et a/. Reduction in depressive symptoms Q
59 Kuikman MA, Coates AM, Burr JF. Markers of low energy availability in overreached predicts improvement in eating disorder symptoms in interpersonal psychotherapy: op
athletes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med 2022;52:2925-41. results from a naturalistic study. J Fat Disord 2020;8:33 >
60 Reardon CL, Hainline B, Aron CM, et a/. Mental health in elite athletes: International 88 Lieberman JL, DE Souza MJ, Wagstaff DA, et a/. Menstrual disruption with exercise is BS
Olympic Committee consensus statement (2019). Br J Sports Med 2019;53:667-99. not linked to an energy availability threshold. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2018;50:551-61. ‘=
61 Henriksen K, Schinke R, McCann S, et a/. Athlete mental health in the Olympic/ 89 De Souza Mj, Koltun KJ, Williams NI. The role of energy availability in reproductive z
Paralympic Quadrennium: a multi-societal consensus statement. /nt J Sport Exerc function in the female athlete Triad and extension of its effects to men: an initial a
Psychol 2020; 18:391—408. working model of a similar syndrome in male athletes. Sports Med 2019;49:125-37. 2
62. Henriksen K, Schinke R, Moesch K, et a/. Consensus statement on improving 90 Jurov |, Keay N, Rauter S. Reducing energy availability in male endurance athletes: ©
the mental health of high performance athletes. Int J Sport Exerc Psychol a randomized trial with a three-step energy reduction. Journal of the International 2
2020;18:553-60. Society of Sports Nutrition 2022;19:179-95. 10.1080/15502783.2022.2065111 o
63  Gouttebarge V, Castaldelli-Maia JM, Gorczynski P, et a/. Occurrence of mental health [Epub ahead of print published Online First]. =
symptoms and disorders in current and former elite athletes: a systematic review and 91 Fagerberg P. Negative consequences of low energy availability in natural male 8
meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med 2019;53:700-6. bodybuilding: A review. International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise c
64 Akesdotter C, Kenta G, Eloranta S, et al. The prevalence of mental health problems Metabolism 2018;28:385-402. 10.1123/ijsnem.2016-0332 [Epub ahead of print a
in elite athletes. J Sci Med Sport 2020;23:329-35. published Online First]. ES
65 Pensgaard AM, Oevreboe TH, Ivarsson A. Mental health among elite athletes in 92 Hackney AC, Sinning WE, Bruot BC. Reproductive hormonal profiles of endurance- a
Norway during a selected period of the COVID-19 pandemic. BM/ Open Sport Exerc trained and untrained males. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1988;20:60-5. ne
Med 2021;7:e001025. 93 Roberts AC, McClure RD, Weiner RI, et a/. Overtraining affects male reproductive 8
66 Schofield KL, Thorpe H, Sims ST. Compartmentalised disciplines: why low energy status. Fertility and Sterility 1993;60:686-92. e
availability research calls for transdisciplinary approaches. Perform Enhanc Health 94 Stenqvist TB, Torstveit MK, Faber J, et al. Impact of a 4-week intensified endurance S
2020;8:100172. training intervention on markers of relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S) 3
67  Langbein RK, Martin D, Allen-Collinson J, et a/. “It's hard to find balance when and performance among well-trained male cyclists. front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2
you're broken”: exploring female endurance athletes’ psychological experience of 2020;11:512365. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2020;11:512365. 10.3389/ °
recovery from relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S). Perform Enhanc Health fendo.2020.512365 [Epub ahead of print published Online First]. Ss
2022;10:100214. 95 Ayers JW, Komesu Y, Romani T, et a/. Anthropomorphic, hormonal, and Psychologic ® S
68 Wells KR, Jeacocke NA, Appaneal R, et a/. The Australian Institute of Sport (AIS) and correlates of semen quality in endurance-trained male athletes. Fertil Steril on
National Eating Disorders Collaboration (NEDC) position statement on disordered 1985;43:917-21. a fy
eating in high performance sport. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1247-58. 96 Hackney AC, Sinning WE, Bruot BC. Hypothalamic-pituitary-Testicular axis function in og
69 Wasserfurth P, Palmowski J, Hahn A, ef a/. Reasons for and consequences of low endurance-trained males. /nt J Sports Med 1990;11:298-303. mS
energy availability in female and male athletes: social environment, adaptations, and 97 Degoutte F, Jouanel P, Begue Ri, et a/. Food restriction, performance, biochemical, 32
prevention. Sports Med Open 2020;6:44. psychological, and endocrine changes in Judo athletes. /nt J Sports Med Zn
70 Martinsen M, Bahr R, Borresen R, et a/. Preventing eating disorders among young 2006;27:9-18. 2S
elite athletes: a randomized controlled trial. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2014;46:435-47. 98 Hooper DR, Kraemer WJ, Saenz C, et a/. The presence of symptoms of testosterone 30
71 Schaal K, VanLoan MD, Hausswirth C, et a/. Decreased energy availability during deficiency in the exercise-Hypogonadal male condition and the role of nutrition. Fur So
training overload is associated with non-functional overreaching and suppressed J Appl Physiol 2017;117:1349-57. & 2
ovarian function in female runners. Appl Physio! Nutr Metab 2021;46:1179-88. 99 Hackney AC. Hypogonadism in exercising males: dysfunction or adaptive-regulatory us
72. Langan-Evans C, Germaine M, Artukovic M, et a/. The psychological and adjustment? Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2020;11:11. 3 S
physiological consequences of low energy availability in a male combat sport athlete. 100 Dipla K, Kraemer RR, Constantini NW, et a/. Relative energy deficiency in sports a
Med Sci Sports Exerc 2021;53:673-83. (RED-S): elucidation of endocrine changes affecting the health of males and females. e a
73. Jurov |, Keay N, Spudi¢ D, et a/. Inducing low energy availability in trained Hormones 2021;20:35-47. o =
endurance male athletes results in poorer explosive power. Fur J App! Physiol 101 Gomez-Merino D, Chennaoui M, Drogou C, et a/. Decrease in serum Leptin after Z. 3
2022;122:503-13. prolonged physical activity in men. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2002;34:1594-9. oa
74 De Souza MJ, Hontscharuk R, Olmsted M, et al. Drive for thinness score is a proxy 102 Kyrdlainen H, Karinkanta J, Santtila M, et al. Hormonal responses during a 3 i
indicator of energy deficiency in exercising women. Appetite 2007;48:359-67. prolonged military field exercise with variable exercise intensity. Eur J App! Physiol a
75 Strock NCA, De Souza MJ, Williams NI. Eating behaviours related to psychological 2008; 102:539--46. $s
stress are associated with functional hypothalamic amenorrhoea in exercising 103  Torstveit MK, Fahrenholtz |, Stenqvist TB, et a/. Within-day energy deficiency and me
women. J Sports Sci 2020;38:2396-406. metabolic perturbation in male endurance athletes. /nt J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab fom
76 Gillbanks L, Mountjoy M, Filbay SR. Lightweight rowers’ perspectives of living with 2018;28:419-27. 2
relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S). PLoS One 2022;17:e0265268. 104 Abedelmalek S, Chtourou H, Souissi N, et a/. Caloric restriction effect on 8
77 Carson TL, West BT, Sonneville K, et a/. Identifying latent classes of relative energy proinflammatory Cytokines, growth hormone, and steroid hormone concentrations 3
deficiency in sport (RED-S) consequences in a sample of collegiate female cross during exercise in Judokas. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2015;2015:809492. o
country runners. Br J Sports Med 2023;57:153-9. 105 Dolan E, McGoldrick A, Davenport C, et a/. An altered hormonal profile and elevated f=)
78 Rogers MA, Appaneal RN, Hughes D, et a/. Prevalence of impaired physiological rate of bone loss are associated with low bone mass in professional horse-racing S
function consistent with relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S): an Australian Jockeys. J Bone Miner Metab 2012;30:534—-42 <
elite and pre-elite cohort. Br J Sports Med 2021;55:38-45. 106 Woods AL, Rice AJ, Garvican-Lewis LA, et al. The effects of intensified training on g
79 Shanmugam \V, Jowett S, Meyer C. Eating psychopathology as a risk factor for resting metabolic rate (RMR), body composition and performance in trained cyclists. “4
depressive symptoms in a sample of British athletes. J Sports Sci 2014;32:1587-95. PLoS ONE 2018;13:e0191644. il
80 Torstveit MK, Fahrenholtz IL, Lichtenstein MB, et a/. Exercise dependence, eating 107 Murphy C, Koehler K. Energy deficiency impairs resistance training gains in lean oS
disorder symptoms and biomarkers of relative energy deficiency in sports (RED-S) mass but not strength: a meta-analysis and meta-regression. Scand J Med Sci Sports 'S
among male endurance athletes. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med 2019;5:e000439. 2022;32:125-37. S
81 Kuikman MA, Mountjoy M, Burr JF. Examining the relationship between exercise 108 Lundy B, Torstveit MK, Stenqvist TB, et al. Screening for low energy availability in &
dependence, disordered eating, and low energy availability. Nutrients 2021;13:2601. male athletes: attempted validation of LEAM-Q. Nutrients 2022;14:1873 2
82. Arthur-Cameselle J, Sossin K, Quatromoni P.A qualitative analysis of factors related 109 Hackney AC, Zieff GH, Lane AR, et a/. Marathon running and sexual libido in adult vu
to eating disorder onset in female collegiate athletes and non-athletes. Eat Disord men: exercise training and racing effects. J Endocrinol Sci 2022;4:10-2. g
2017;25:199-215. 110 Hackney AC, Lane AR, Register-Mihalik J, et a/. Endurance exercise training and male 2
83 Burke LM, Close GL, Lundy B, et a/. Relative energy deficiency in sport in male sexual libido. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2017;49:1383-8. c
athletes: a commentary on its presentation among selected groups of male athletes. 111 Logue DM, Madigan SM, Melin A, et a/. Self-reported reproductive health of athletic @
Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018;28:364-74. and recreationally active males in Ireland: potential health effects interfering with sis
84 Pritchett K, DiFolco A, Glasgow S, et al. Risk of low energy availability in national performance. Fur J Sport Sci 2021;21:275-84. g
and international level Paralympic athletes: an exploratory investigation. Nutrients 112. Jonvik KL, Vardardottir B, Broad E. How do we assess energy availability and RED-S s
2021;13:979. risk factors in para athletes? Nutrients 2022; 14:1068. S

85 Robinson SL, Lambeth-Mansell A, Gillibrand G, et a/. A nutrition and conditioning 113. Brook EM, Tenforde AS, Broad EM, et a/. Low energy availability, menstrual :
intervention for natural bodybuilding contest preparation: case study. J Int Soc Sports dysfunction, and impaired bone health: a survey of elite para athletes. Scand J Med =~
Nutr 2015;12:20. Sci Sports 2019;29:678-85. =
ps D
Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 1091 ay
=

Consensus statement e
wn
114 Egger, Flueck JL. Energy availability in male and female elite wheelchair athletes 143. Kettunen O, Heikkila M, Linnamo \V, et a/. Nutrition knowledge is associated with 8
over seven consecutive training days. Nutrients 2020;12:3262. energy availability and carbohydrate intake in young female cross-country skiers. a
115 Sherk VD, Bemben MG, Bemben DA. BMD and bone geometry in transtibial and Nutrients 2021;13:1769. =
transfemoral amputees. J Bone Miner Res 2008;23:1449-57. 144 Heikkila M, Valve R, Lehtovirta M, et a/. Nutrition knowledge among young Finnish Q
116 Colantonio A, Mar W, Escobar M, et al. Women’s health outcomes after traumatic endurance athletes and their coaches. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018;28:522-7.
brain injury. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 2010;19:1109-16. 145 Lodge MT, Ackerman KE, Garay J. Knowledge of the female athlete triad and relative >
117 Ripley DL, Harrison-Felix C, Sendroy-Terrill M, et a/. The impact of female energy deficiency in sport among female cross-country athletes and support staff. / BS
reproductive function on outcomes after traumatic brain injury. Arch Phys Med Athl Train 2022;57:385-92. ‘=
Rehabil 2008;89:1090-6. 146 Frideres JE, Mottinger SG, Palao JM. Collegiate coaches’ knowledge of the female o
118 Morse LR, Biering-Soerensen F, Carbone LD, et a/. Bone mineral density testing in athlete Triad in relation to sport type. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 2016;56:287-94. gS
spinal cord injury: 2019 ISCD official position. J Clin Densitom 2019;22:554-66. 147 Pantano KJ. Knowledge, attitude, and skill of high school coaches with regard to the 2
119 ISCD Official Position Stand. Pediatric. 2019. Available: https://iscd.org/learn/official- female athlete Triad. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 2017;30:540-5. ©
positions/pediatric-positions/ 148 Curry EJ, Logan C, Ackerman K, et a/. Female athlete Triad awareness among 2
120 International Society for Clinical Densitometry. Adult official positions of the ISC. Multispecialty physicians. Sports Med Open 2015; 1:38. =)
2019. Available: https://iscd.org/learn/official-positions/adult-positions/ 149 Pai NN, Brown RC, Black KE. The development and validation of a questionnaire =
121. Fredericson M, Kussman A, Misra M, et a/. The male athlete Triad-A consensus to assess relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S) knowledge. J Sci Med Sport 8
statement from the female and male athlete Triad coalition part II: diagnosis, 2022;25:794-9. c
treatment, and return-to-play. Clin J Sport Med 2021;31:349-66. 150 Brown KN, Wengreen HJ, Beals KA. Knowledge of the female athlete Triad, and a
122 NattivA, De Souza MJ, Koltun KJ, et a/. The male athlete Triad—A consensus prevalence of Triad risk factors among female high school athletes and their coaches. ES
statement from the female and male athlete Triad coalition part 1: definition and J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 2014;27:278-82. a
scientific basis. Clin J Sport Med 2021;31:345-53. 151 Kroshus E, Fischer AN, Nichols JF. Assessing the awareness and behaviors of U. J Sch D>
123 Nattiv A, Loucks AB, Manore MM, et al. American college of sports medicine position Nurs 2015;31:272-9. 8
stand. The female athlete Triad. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2007;39:1867-82. 152 Stewart TM, Pollard 7, Hildebrandt T, et a/. The female athlete body project study: e
124 Nielsen J. Systems biology of metabolism. Annu Rev Biochem 2017;86:245-75. 18-month outcomes in eating disorder symptoms and risk factors. /nt J Fat Disord S
125 Ihle R, Loucks AB. Dose-response relationships between energy availability and bone 2019;52:1291-300. 3
turnover in young exercising women. J Bone Miner Res 2004;19:1231-40. 153 Perelman H, Schwartz N, Yeoward-Dodson J, et a/. Reducing eating disorder risk 2
126 Loucks AB. Energy Balance and energy availability. 7he Encyclopaedia of Sports among male athletes: a randomized controlled trial investigating the male athlete °
Medicine 2013:72-87. body project. Int J Eat Disord 2022;55:193-206. 3
127 Loucks AB, Verdun M, Heath EM. Low energy availability, not stress of exercise, alters 154 Heikkila M, Lehtovirta M, Autio O, et a/. The impact of nutrition education ® S
LH pulsatility in exercising women. J App/ Physiol (1985) 1998;84:37-46. intervention with and without a mobile phone application on nutrition knowledge on
128 Loucks AB, Heath EM. Dietary restriction reduces luteinizing hormone (LH) pulse among young endurance athletes. Nutrients 2019;11:2249. es
frequency during waking hours and increases LH pulse amplitude during sleep in 155 Fahrenholtz IL, Melin AK, Garthe |, et a/. Effects of a 16-week digital intervention on og
young Menstruating women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:910-5. sports nutrition knowledge and behavior in female endurance athletes with risk of c 3
129 Burke LM, Lundy B, Fahrenholtz IL, et a/. Pitfalls of conducting and interpreting relative energy deficiency in sport (REDs). Nutrients 2023;15:1082. 32
estimates of energy availability in free-living athletes. /nt J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 156 Becker CB, McDaniel L, Bull S, et a/. Can we reduce eating disorder risk factors in Zn
2018;28:350-63 female college athletes? A randomized exploratory investigation of two peer-led 2S
130 Sundgot-Borgen J, Meyer NL, Lohman TG, et a/. How to minimise the health risks interventions. Body Image 2012;9:31-42. 30
to athletes who compete in weight-sensitive sports review and position statement 157 Coelho GM, Gomes Al, Ribeiro BG, et a/. Prevention of eating disorders in female So
on behalf of the ad hoc research working group on body composition, health and athletes. Open Access J Sports Med 2014;5:105-13. & 2
performance, under the auspices of the IOC Medical Commission. Br J Sports Med 158 Bratland-Sanda S, Sundgot-Borgen J. Eating disorders in athletes: overview of us
2013;47:1012-22. prevalence, risk factors and recommendations for prevention and treatment. Fur J 3 S
131. Kontele |, Vassilakou T, Donti 0. Weight pressures and eating disorder symptoms Sport Sci 2013;13:499-508. go
among adolescent female gymnasts of different performance levels in Greece. 159 Kuikman MA, Mountjoy M, Stellingwerff T, et a/. A review of Nonpharmacological e Q
Children (Basel) 2022;9:254. strategies in the treatment of relative energy deficiency in sport. Int J Sport Nutr o =
132 Ackerman KE, StellingwerffT, Elliott-Sale KJ, et a/. #REDS (relative energy deficiency Exerc Metab 2021;31:268-75. &: 3
in sport): time for a revolution in sports culture and systems to improve athlete 160 Hilton LK, Loucks AB. Low energy availability, not exercise stress, suppresses the oa
health and performance. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:369-70. diurnal rhythm of Leptin in healthy young women. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 3 i
133 Logue DM, Mahony L, Corish CA, et a/. Athletes’ and coaches’ perceptions of 2000;278:E43-9. ac
nutritional advice: eating more food for health and performance. Nutrients 161 De Souza MJ, Mallinson RJ, Strock NCA, et a/. Randomised controlled trial of the $s
2021;13:1925. effects of increased energy intake on Menstrual recovery in exercising women with me
134 Boudreault V, Gagnon-Girouard M-P, Carbonneau N, et a/. Extreme weight control Menstrual disturbances: the ‘REFUEL’ study. Hum Reprod 2021;36:2285-97. fon
behaviors among adolescent athletes: links with weight-related maltreatment from 162 De Souza MJ, Ricker EA, Mallinson RJ, et a/. Bone mineral density in response to Fs
parents and coaches and sport ethic norms. Int Rev Sociol Sport 2022;57:421-39. increased energy intake in exercising women with oligomenorrhea/amenorthea: the 8
135 Mountjoy M, Junge A, Magnusson C, et a/. Beneath the surface: mental health REFUEL randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2022;115:1457-72. 3
and Harassment and abuse of athletes participating in the FINA (Aquatics) world 163 Ackerman KE, Singhal \, Baskaran C, et a/. Oestrogen replacement improves bone o
championships, 2019. Clin J Sport Med 2022;32:95-102. mineral density in oligo-amenorrhoeic athletes: a randomised clinical trial. Br J Sports Ss
136 Kasper AM, Langan-Evans C, Hudson JF, et al. Come back skinfolds, all is forgiven: Med 2019;53:229-36. S
a narrative review of the efficacy of common body composition methods in applied 164 Chang CJ, Putukian M, Aerni G, et a/. Mental health issues and psychological <
sports practice. Nutrients 2021;13:1075. factors in athletes: detection, management, effect on performance, and prevention: g
137 Miller W, Furhapter-Rieger A, Ahammer H, et a/. Relative body weight and American Medical Society for sports medicine position statement. Clin J Sport Med “4
standardised brightness-mode ultrasound measurement of subcutaneous fat in 2020;30:e61-87. s
athletes: an international multicentre reliability study, under the auspices of the IOC 165 Loucks AB, Heath EM. Induction of low-T3 syndrome in exercising women occurs at oS
Medical Commission. Sports Med 2020;50:597-614. a threshold of energy availability. Am J Physiol 1994;266:R817-23. 'S
138 Ackland TR, Lohman TG, Sundgot-Borgen J, et a/. Current status of body composition 166 Logue DM, Madigan SM, Melin A, et a/. Low energy availability in athletes 2020: an S
assessment in sport: review and position statement on behalf of the ad hoc research updated narrative review of prevalence, risk, within-day energy balance, knowledge, &
working group on body composition health and performance, under the auspices of and impact on sports performance. Nutrients 2020;12:835. 2
the |. 0.C. Medical Commission. Sports Med 2012;42:227--49. 167 Logue D, Madigan SM, Delahunt E, et a/. Low energy availability in athletes: a review vu
139 Van Der Ploeg GE, Withers RT, Laforgia J. Percent body fat via DEXA: comparison of prevalence, dietary patterns, physiological health, and sports performance. Sports g
with a four-compartment model. J App! Physiol (1985) 2003;94:499-506. Med 2018;48:73-96. 2
140 Meyer NL, Sundgot-Borgen J, Lohman 1G, et a/. Body composition for health and 168 VanHeest JL, Rodgers CD, Mahoney CE, et a/. Ovarian suppression impairs sport c
performance: a survey of body composition assessment practice carried out by the performance in junior elite female swimmers. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2014;46:156-66. @
ad hoc research working group on body composition, health and performance under 169 Heikura IA, Burke LM, Bergland D, et a/. Impact of energy availability, health, sis
the auspices of the IOC Medical Commission. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:1044-53. and sex on hemoglobin-mass responses following live-high-train-high altitude g
141 Mountjoy M, Sundgot-Borgen J, Burke L, et a/. The IOC relative energy deficiency in training in elite female and male distance athletes. nt J Sports Physiol Perform s
sport clinical assessment tool (RED-S CAT). Br J Sports Med 2015;49:1354. 2018;13:1090-6. S

142. Gillbanks L, Mountjoy M, Filbay SR. Insufficient knowledge and Inapproriate 170 Papageorgiou M, Martin D, Colgan H, et a/. Bone metabolic responses to low :
Physiotherapy management of relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S) in energy availability achieved by diet or exercise in active Eumenorrheic women. Bone =~
lightweight rowers. Phys Ther Sport 2022;54:8-15. 2018;114:181-8. =
ps D
1092 Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 ay
=

Consensus statement e

wn

171 Ishibashi A, Kojima C, Tanabe Y, et al. Effect of low energy availability during three 200 Hilkens L, VAN Schijndel N, Weijer V, et a/. Low bone mineral density and associated 8

consecutive days of endurance training on iron metabolism in male long distance tisk factors in elite cyclists at different stages of a professional Cycling career. Med a

runners. Physiol Rep 2020;8:e14494. Sci Sports Exerc 2023;55:957-65. =z

172 American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 201 Barrack MT, Fredericson M, Tenforde AS, et al. Evidence of a cumulative effect for risk Q

disorders (5th ed., text rev.). American Psychiatric Association, 2022. factors predicting low bone mass among male adolescent athletes. Br J Sports Med op

173 Loucks AB. The response of luteinizing hormone Pulsatility to 5 days of low energy 2017;51:200-5. >

availability disappears by 14 years of gynecological age. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 202 Southmayd EA, Mallinson RJ, Williams NI, et a/. Unique effects of energy versus BS

2006;91:3158-64. estrogen deficiency on multiple components of bone strength in exercising women. ‘=

174 Koltun KJ, De Souza MJ, Scheid JL, et a/. Energy availability is associated with Osteoporos Int 2017;28:1365-76. o

luteinizing hormone pulse frequency and induction of Luteal phase defects. J Clin 203 Ackerman KE, Nazem T, Chapko D, et a/. Bone microarchitecture is impaired in gS

Endocrinol Metab 2020; 105:185-93. adolescent amenortheic athletes compared with eumenorrheic athletes and 2

175 Ruffing KM, Koltun KJ, De Souza Mj, et a/. Moderate weight loss is associated nonathletic controls. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:3123-33. o

with reductions in LH pulse frequency and increases in 24-hour Cortisol with 204 Ackerman KE, Putman M, Guereca G, et a/. Cortical microstructure and estimated 2

no change in perceived stress in young Ovulatory women. Physiol Behav bone strength in young amenorrheic athletes, eumenorrheic athletes and non- =)

2022;254:113885. athletes. Bone 2012;51:680-7. =

176 Baer JT. Endocrine parameters in amenorrheic and eumenorrheic adolescent female 205 Greene DA, Naughton GA, Jander CB, et a/. Bone health of apprentice Jockeys using 8

runners. Int J Sports Med 1993;14:191-5. peripheral quantitative computed tomography. Int J Sports Med 2013;34:688-94. c

177 Williams NI, Young JC, McArthur JW, et a/. Strenuous exercise with caloric restriction: 206 Holtzman B, Popp KL, Tenforde AS, ef a/. Low energy availability surrogates a

effect on luteinizing hormone secretion. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1995;27:1390-8. associated with lower bone mineral density and bone stress injury site. PM R 3

178  Rickenlund A, Thorén M, Carlstrom K, et a/. Diurnal profiles of testosterone and 2022;14:587-96. a

pituitary hormones suggest different mechanisms for Menstrual disturbances in 207 Gehman S, Ackerman KE, Caksa S, et a/. Restrictive eating and prior low-energy ne

endurance athletes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004;89:702-7. fractures are associated with history of multiple bone stress injuries. Int J Sport Nutr 8

179 Ackerman KE, Patel KT, Guereca G, et a/. Cortisol Secretory parameters in young Exerc Metab 2022;32:325-33. Y

exercisers in relation to LH secretion and bone parameters. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 208 Tenforde AS, Katz NB, Sainani KL, et a/. Female athlete Triad risk factors are more S

2013;78:114-9. strongly associated with trabecular-rich versus cortical-rich bone stress injuries in 3

180 Loucks AB, Mortola JF, Girton L, et a/. Alterations in the hypothalamic-pituitary- collegiate athletes. Orthop J Sports Med 2022;10. 2

ovarian and the hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal axes in athletic women. J Clin 209 Tenforde AS, Carlson JL, Chang A, et a/. Association of the female athlete Triad risk °

Endocrinol Metab 1989;68:402-11. assessment stratification to the development of bone stress injuries in collegiate Ss

181. Kaiserauer S, Snyder AC, Sleeper M, et al. Nutritional, physiological, and menstrual athletes. Am J Sports Med 2017;45:302-10. ® S

status of distance runners. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1989;21:120-5. 210 Kraus E, Tenforde AS, Nattiv A, et a/. Bone stress injuries in male distance runners: on

182 Myerson M, Gutin B, Warren MP, et al. Resting metabolic rate and energy balance in higher modified female athlete Triad cumulative risk assessment scores predict es

amenortheic and eumenorrheic runners. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1991;23:15. increased rates of injury. Br J Sports Med 2019;53:237—-42. og

183 Gibbs JC, Williams NI, Scheid JL, et a/. The Association of a high drive for thinness 211 Southmayd EA, Williams NI, Mallinson RJ, et a/. Energy deficiency suppresses bone c 3

with energy deficiency and severe Menstrual disturbances: confirmation in a large turnover in exercising women with menstrual disturbances. / Clin Endocrinol Metab S 3

population of exercising women. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2011;21:280-90. 2019;104:3131-45. Sh

184 Tornberg AB, Melin A, Koivula FM, et al. Reduced neuromuscular performance in 212. Waldron-Lynch F, Murray BF, Brady JJ, et a/. High bone turnover in Irish professional 2S

Amenortheic elite endurance athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2017;49:2478-85. Jockeys. Osteoporos Int 2010;21:521-5. 30

185 Freitas L, Amorim T, Humbert L, et a/. Cortical and trabecular bone analysis 213 Murphy C, Bilek LDD, Koehler K. Low energy availability with and without a high- So

of professional dancers using 3D-DXA: a case-control study. J Sports Sci protein diet suppresses bone formation and increases bone resorption in men: a & 2

2019;37:82-9. randomized controlled pilot study. Nutrients 2021;13:802. us

186 Weimann E, Witzel C, Schwidergall S, et a/. Peripubertal perturbations in elite 214 Melin A, Tornberg AB, Skouby S, et a/. The LEAF questionnaire: a screening tool for 3 S

gymnasts caused by sport specific training regimes and inadequate nutritional the identification of female athletes at risk for the female athlete triad. Br J Sports a

intake. Int J Sports Med 2000;21:210-5. Med 2014;48:540-5. e a

187 Gibbs JC, Williams NI, Mallinson RJ, et a/. Effect of high dietary restraint on energy 215 Williams NI, Leidy HJ, Hill BR, et a/. Magnitude of daily energy deficit predicts o =

availability and Menstrual status. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2013;45:1790-7. frequency but not severity of menstrual disturbances associated with exercise and Z. 3

188 Hulmi JJ, Isola V, Suonpaa M, et al. The effects of intensive weight reduction on caloric restriction. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2015;308:E29-39. 2 =>

body composition and serum hormones in female fitness competitors. Front Physiol 216 Loucks AB, Callister R. Induction and prevention of low-T3 syndrome in exercising 3 i

2016;7:689. women. Am J Physiol 1993;264:R924-30. ac

189 Mathisen TF, Heia J, Raustal M, et a/. Physical health and symptoms of 217 Koehler K, Williams NI, Mallinson Rj, et a/. Low resting metabolic rate in exercise- $s

relative energy deficiency in female fitness athletes. Scand J Med Sci Sports associated Amenorrhea is not due to a reduced proportion of highly active metabolic me

2020;30:135-47. tissue compartments. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2016;311:E480-7. fon

190 Reed JL, De Souza MJ, Mallinson Rj, et a/. Energy availability discriminates clinical 218 Strock NCA, Koltun KJ, Southmayd EA, et al. Indices of resting metabolic rate 3

Menstrual status in exercising women. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 2015;12:11. accurately reflect energy deficiency in exercising women. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc 8

191 Stenqvist TB, Melin AK, Garthe |, et a/. Prevalence of Surrogate markers of relative Metab 2020;30:14-24. 3

energy deficiency in male Norwegian Olympic-level athletes. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc 219 Melin A, Tornberg AB, Skouby S, et a/. Energy availability and the female athlete Triad o

Metab 2021;31:497-506. in elite endurance athletes. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2015;25:610-22. f=)

192 Friedl KE, Moore RJ, Hoyt RW, et a/. Endocrine markers of semistarvation 220 De Souza MJ, Lee DK, VanHeest JL, ef a/. Severity of energy-related Menstrual S

in healthy lean men in a multistressor environment. J App! Physiol (1985) disturbances increases in proportion to indices of energy conservation in exercising <

2000;88:1820-30. women. Fertil Steril 2007;88:97 1-5. g

193 Kasper AM, Crighton B, Langan-Evans C, et al. Case study: extreme weight making 221 O'Donnell E, Harvey PJ, De Souza MJ. Relationships between vascular resistance “4

causes relative energy deficiency, dehydration, and acute kidney injury in a male and energy deficiency, nutritional status and oxidative stress in oestrogen deficient il

mixed martial arts athlete. /nt J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2019;29:331-8. physically active women. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2009;70:294-302. oS

194 De Souza Mj, Arce JC, Pescatello LS, et a/. Gonadal hormones and semen quality 222. Fahrenholtz IL, Sjodin A, Benardot D, et a/. Within-day energy deficiency and 'S

in male runners. A volume threshold effect of endurance training. Int J Sports Med reproductive function in female endurance athletes. Scand J Med Sci Sports S

1994;15:383-91. 2018;28:1139-46. &

195 Soyka LA, Misra M, Frenchman A, et al. Abnormal bone mineral accrual in adolescent 223 Thompson J, Manore MM, Skinner JS. Resting metabolic rate and thermic effect of a 2

girls with anorexia nervosa. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002;87:4177-85. meal in low- and adequate-energy intake male endurance athletes. /nt J Sport Nutr vu

196 Barrack MT, Van Loan MD, Rauh M, et al. Disordered eating, development of 1993;3:194-206. g

Menstrual irregularity, and reduced bone mass change after a 3-year follow- 224 Maestu J, Jiirimde J, Valter |, et a/. Increases in ghrelin and decreases in leptin 2

up in female adolescent endurance runners. /nt J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab without altering adiponectin during extreme weight loss in male competitive c

2021;31:337-44. bodybuilders. Metabolism 2008;57:221-5. @

197 Barry DW, Kohrt WM. BMD decreases over the course of a year in competitive male 225 Cano Sokoloff N, Eguiguren ML, Wargo K, et a/. Bone parameters in relation to sis

cyclists. J Bone Miner Res 2008;23:484-91. attitudes and feelings associated with disordered eating in oligo-amenortheic g

198 O'Donnell E, Scheid JL, West SL, et a/. Impaired vascular function in exercising athletes, eumenorrheic athletes, and nonathletes. /nt J Eat Disord 2015;48:522-6. s

anovulatory premenopausal women is associated with low bone mineral density. 226 Finn EE, Tenforde AS, Fredericson M, et a/. Markers of low-iron status are associated S
Scand J Med Sci Sports 2019;29:544-53. with female athlete triad risk factors. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2021;53:1969-74. :

199 Gibbs JC, Nattiv A, Barrack MT, et a/. Low bone density risk is higher in exercising 227° Hennigar SR, McClung JP, Hatch-McChesney A, et a/. Energy deficit increases =~

women with multiple triad risk factors. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2014;46:167-76 hepcidin and exacerbates declines in dietary iron absorption following strenuous =

ps D

Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 1093 ay

=

Consensus statement e
wn
physical activity: a randomized-controlled cross-over trial. Am J Clin Nutr 255 Kistler BM, Fitschen PJ, Ranadive SM, et a/. Case study: natural bodybuilding contest 8
2021;113:359-69. preparation. /nt J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2014;24:694-700. a
228 Heikura IA, Burke LM, Bergland D, et al. Impact of energy availability, health, 256 Smythe J, Colebourn C, Prisco L, et a/. Cardiac abnormalities identified with =
and sex on hemoglobin-mass responses following live-high-train-high altitude echocardiography in anorexia nervosa: systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Q
training in elite female and male distance athletes. nt J Sports Physiol Perform Psychiatry 2021;219:477-86. op
2018;13:1090-6. 257 Areta JL, Burke LM, Camera DM, et a/. Reduced resting Skeletal muscle protein >
229 McLean BD, Buttifant D, Gore CJ, et a/. Yeat-to-year variability in Haemoglobin mass synthesis is rescued by resistance exercise and protein ingestion following short-term BS
response to two altitude training camps. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:i51-8. energy deficit. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2014;306:E989-97. ‘=
230 Whitney KE, Holtzman B, Cook D, et a/. Low energy availability and impact sport 258 Pasiakos SM, Vislocky LM, Carbone JW, et a/. Acute energy deprivation affects z
participation as risk factors for urinary Incontinence in female athletes. J Pediatr Urol Skeletal muscle protein synthesis and associated intracellular signaling proteins in gS
2021;17:290. physically active adults. J Nutr 2010;140:745-51. 2
231 Carvalhais A, Aratjo J, Natal Jorge R, et a/. Urinary Incontinence and disordered 259 Oxfeldt M, Phillips SM, Andersen OE, et a/. Low energy availability reduces ©
eating in female elite athletes. / Sci Med Sport 2019;22:140-4. myofibrillar and sarcoplasmic muscle protein synthesis in trained females. J Physiol 2
232 Bo K, Borgen JS. Prevalence of stress and urge urinary Incontinence in elite athletes 2023;601:3481-97. =)
and controls. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2001;33:1797-802. 260 Martin-Rincon M, Perez-Suarez |, Pérez-Lopez A, et al. Protein synthesis signaling =
233 Kojima C, Ishibashi A, Ebi K, et a/. Exogenous glucose oxidation during endurance in skeletal muscle is refractory to whey protein ingestion during a severe energy 8
exercise under low energy availability. PLoS ONE 2022;17:e0276002. deficit evoked by prolonged exercise and caloric restriction. Int J Obes (Lond) c
234 Maestu J, Eliakim A, Jiirimae J, et a/. Anabolic and Catabolic hormones and energy 2019;43:872-82. a
balance of the male bodybuilders during the preparation for the competition. J 261 Tarnopolsky MA, Zawada C, Richmond LB, et a/. Gender differences in carbohydrate 3
Strength Cond Res 2010;24:1074-81. loading are related to energy intake. J App/ Physiol (1985) 2001;91:225-30. a
235 Rickenlund A, Eriksson MJ, Schenck-Gustafsson K, ef a/. Amenorrhea in female 262 Costill DL, Flynn MG, Kirwan JP, et al. Effects of repeated days of intensified D>
athletes is associated with endothelial dysfunction and unfavorable lipid profile. J training on muscle glycogen and swimming performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 8
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2005;90:1354-9. 1988;20:249-54. Y
236 Friday KE, Drinkwater BL, Bruemmer B, ef a/. Elevated plasma low-density lipoprotein 263 Nindl BC, Alemany JA, Kellogg MD, et al. Utility of circulating IGF-I as a biomarker S
and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels in amenorrheic athletes: effects for assessing body composition changes in men during periods of high physical 3
of endogenous hormone status and nutrient intake. J Clin Endocrinol Metab activity superimposed upon energy and sleep restriction. J App/ Physiol (1985) 2
1993;77:1605-9. 2007;103:340-6. 10.1152/japplphysiol.01321.2006 [Epub ahead of print published °
237 Fahrenholtz IL, Melin AK, Wasserfurth P, et a/. Risk of low energy availability, Online First]. 3
disordered eating, exercise addiction, and food Intolerances in female endurance 264 Nindl BC, Rarick KR, Castellani JW, et a/. Altered secretion of growth hormone ® S
athletes. Front Sports Act Living 2022;4:869594. and luteinizing hormone after 84 H of sustained physical exertion superimposed on
238 Baskaran C, Plessow F, Ackerman KE, et al. A cross-sectional analysis of verbal on caloric and sleep restriction. J App! Physiol (1985) 2006; 100:120-8. 10.1152/ a fy
memory and executive control across athletes with varying Menstrual status and japplphysiol.01415.2004 [Epub ahead of print published Online First]. og
non-athletes. Psychiatry Res 2017;258:605-6. 265 Marion M, Lacroix $, Caquard M, et a/. Earlier diagnosis in anorexia Nervosa: better c 3
239 Terhoeven \V, Faschingbauer S, Huber J, et a/. Verbal memory following weight gain watch growth charts! J eat Disord 2020;8:42 J Eat Disord 2020;8:42. 10.1186/ S 3
in adult patients with anorexia nervosa: a longitudinal study. Fur Eat Disord Rev s40337-020-00321-4 [Epub ahead of print published Online First]. Zn
2023;31:271-84. 266 Modan-Moses D, Yaroslavsky A, Pinhas-Hamiel 0, et a/. Prospective Longitudinal D 8
240 Guillaume S, Gorwood P, Jollant F, et a/. Impaired decision-making in symptomatic assessment of linear growth and adult height in female adolescents with anorexia 30
anorexia and bulimia nervosa patients: a meta-analysis. Psychol Med Nervosa. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2021;106:e1-10. So
2015;45:3377-91. 267 Siegel JH, Hardoff D, Golden NH, et a/. Medical complications in male adolescents & 2
241 Martin D, Papageorgiou M, Colgan H, et a/. The effects of short-term low with anorexia Nervosa. J Adolesc Health 1995;16:448-53. us
energy availability, achieved through diet or exercise, on cognitive function in 268 Modan-Moses D, Yaroslavsky A, Novikov |, et a/. Stunting of growth as a major 3 S
oral contraceptive users and eumenorrheic women. App/ Physiol Nutr Metab feature of anorexia Nervosa in male adolescents. Pediatrics 2003;111:270-6. a
2021;46:781-9. 269 Bromley SJ, Drew MK, Talpey S, et a/. A systematic review of prospective e Q
242. Tchanturia K, Davies H, Roberts M, et a/. Poor cognitive flexibility in eating Epidemiological research into injury and illness in Olympic combat sport. Br J Sports o =
disorders: examining the evidence using the Wisconsin card sorting task. PLoS ONE Med 2018;52:8-16. 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097313 [Epub ahead of print published 2 3
2012;7:e28331. Online First]. 2 =>
243 O'Donnell E, Harvey PJ, Goodman JM, et a/. Long-term estrogen deficiency 270 Logue DM, Madigan SM, Heinen M, et al. Screening for risk of low energy 3 i
LOWERS regional blood flow, resting systolic blood pressure, and heart availability in athletic and Recreationally active females in Ireland. Eur J Sport Sci a
rate in exercising premenopausal women. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2019;19:112-22. $s
2007;292:E1401-9. 271 Hagmar M, Hirschberg AL, Berglund L, et a/. Special attention to the weight-control me
244 Rossow LM, Fukuda DH, Fahs CA, et a/. Natural bodybuilding competition strategies employed by Olympic athletes striving for leanness is required. Clin J Sport fom
preparation and recovery: a 12-month case study. /nt J Sports Physiol Perform Med 2008;18:5-9. 2
2013;8:582-92. 272. Sarin HV, Gudelj |, Honkanen J, et a/. Molecular pathways mediating 8
245. Skolnick A, Schulman RC, Galindo RJ, et a/. The endocrinopathies of male anorexia immunosuppression in response to prolonged intensive physical training, low-energy 3
nervosa: case series. AACE Clin Case Rep 2016;2:e351-7. availability, and intensive weight loss. Front Immunol 2019;10:907. o
246 Olivares JL, Vazquez M, Fleta J, et a/. Cardiac findings in adolescents with anorexia 273 McGuire A, Warrington G, Doyle L. Prevalence of low energy availability and Ss
nervosa at diagnosis and after weight restoration. Eur J Pediatr 2005; 164:383-6. associations with seasonal changes in salivary hormones and IgA in elite male Gaelic S
247 Galetta F, Franzoni F Cupisti A, et a/. QT interval dispersion in young women with Footballers. Eur J Nutr 2023;62:1809-20. <
anorexia nervosa. J Pediatr 2002;140:456-60. 274 Ihalainen JK, Kettunen O, McGawley K, et a/. Body composition, energy availability, g
248 O'Donnell E, Goodman JM, Mak §, et a/. Discordant orthostatic reflex renin— training, and Menstrual status in female runners. /nt J Sports Physiol Perform “4
angiotensin and sympathoneural responses in premenopausal exercising- 2021;16:1043-8. a
hypoestrogenic women. Hypertension 2015;65:1089-95. 275 Edama M, Inaba H, Hoshino F. et a/. The relationship between the female athlete oS
249 Shamim T, Golden NH, Arden M, et a/. Resolution of vital sign instability: an objective triad and injury rates in collegiate female athletes. Peer/ 2021;9:e11092. 'S
measure of medical stability in anorexia nervosa. J Adolesc Health 2003;32:73-7. 276 Rauh MJ, Nichols JF, Barrack MT. Relationships among injury and disordered eating, S
250 Hoch AZ, Jurva JW, Staton MA, et a/. Athletic amenorrhea and endothelial Menstrual dysfunction, and low bone mineral density in high school athletes: a BSS
dysfunction. WiM/ 2007; 106:301-6. prospective study. J Ath! Train 2010;45:243-52. 2
251 Hoch AZ, Papanek P, Szabo A, et al. Association between the female athlete triad 277 Thein-Nissenbaum JM, Carr KE. Female athlete triad syndrome in the high school vu
and endothelial dysfunction in dancers. Clin J Sport Med 2011;21:119-25. athlete. Phys Ther Sport 2011;12:108-16. g
252 Zeni Hoch A, Dempsey RL, Carrera GF, et a/. Is there an association between 278 Jederstrém M, Agnafors S, Ekegren C, et a/. Determinants of sports injury in young 2
athletic amenorrhea and endothelial cell dysfunction? Med Sci Sports Exerc female Swedish competitive figure Skaters. Front Sports Act Living 2021;3:686019. c
2003;35:377-83. 279 Woods AL, Garvican-Lewis LA, Lundy B, et al. New approaches to determine fatigue @
253 O'Donnell E, Goodman JM, Mak , et a/. Impaired vascular function in physically in elite athletes during intensified training: resting metabolic rate and pacing profile. sis
active premenopausal women with functional hypothalamic amenorrhea is PLoS One 2017;12:e0173807. g
associated with low shear stress and increased vascular tone. J Clin Endocrinol 280 Harber VJ, Petersen SR, Chilibeck PD. Thyroid hormone concentrations and muscle s
Metab 2014;99:1798-806. metabolism in Amenorrheic and Eumenorrheic athletes. Can J App! Physiol S

254 Augustine JA, Lefferts WK, Dowthwaite JN, ef a/. Subclinical Atherosclerotic 1998;23:293-306. :
risk in endurance-trained premenopausal Amenortheic women. Atherosclerosis 281 Schoenfeld BJ, Alto A, Grgic J, et al. Alterations in body composition, resting =~
2016;244:157-64. metabolic rate, muscular strength, and eating behavior in response to natural =
ps D
1094 Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 ay
=

Consensus statement e
wn
bodybuilding competition preparation: A case study. J Strength Cond Res 312. Sterringer T, Larson-Meyer DE. RMR ratio as a Surrogate marker for low energy 8
2020;34:3124-38. availability. Curr Nutr Rep 2022;11:263-72. a
282. Kettunen O, lhalainen JK, Ohtonen O, et a/. Energy availability during training camp 313 Sachs KV, Harnke B, Mehler PS, et a/. Cardiovascular complications of anorexia =
is associated with signs of Overreaching and changes in performance in young Nervosa: a systematic review. Int J Eat Disord 2016;49:238—-48. Q
female cross-country skiers. Biomed Hum Kinet 2021; 13:246-54. 314 Benjamin J, Sim L, Owens MT, et a/. Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome and
283 Tinsley GM, Trexler ET, Smith-Ryan AE, et al. Changes in body composition disordered eating: clarifying the overlap. J Dev Behav Pediatr 2021;42:291-8. >
and neuromuscular performance through preparation, 2 Competitions, and a 315 Friars D, Walsh O, McNicholas F. Assessment and management of cardiovascular BS
recovery period in an experienced female physique athlete. J Strength Cond Res complications in eating disorders. J Eat Disord 2023;11:13. ‘=
2019;33:1823-39. 316 Crone C, Fochtmann LJ, Attia E, et a/. The American Psychiatric Association practice o
284 Ingjer F, Sundgot-Borgen J. Influence of body weight reduction on maximal oxygen guideline for the treatment of patients with eating disorders. Am J Psychiatry gS
uptake in female elite athletes. Scand J Med Sci Sports 1991;1:141-6. 2023;180:167—71. 2
285 Matheson GO, Shultz R, Bido J, et a/. Return-to-play decisions: are they the team 317. Allison KC, Spaeth A, Hopkins CM. Sleep and eating disorders. Curr Psychiatry Rep ©
physician’s responsibility? Clin J Sport Med 2011;21:25-30. 2016;18:92. 2
286 Joy E, De Souza MJ, NattivA, et a/. 2014 female athlete Triad coalition consensus 318 Devrim A, Bilgic P, Hongu N. Is there any relationship between body image =)
statement on treatment and return to play of the female athlete Triad. Curr Sports perception, eating disorders nd muscle dysmorphic disorders in male bodybuilders? =
Med Rep 2014;13:219-32. Am J Mens Health 2018;12:1746-58. 8
287 Elliott-Sale KJ, Minahan CL, de Jonge X, et a/. Methodological considerations for 319 Godoy-Izquierdo D, Ramirez M)J, Diaz |, et al. A systematic review on exercise c
studies in sport and exercise science with women as participants: a working guide addiction and the disordered eating-eating disorders continuum in the competitive a
for standards of practice for research on women. Sports Med 2021;51:843-61. sport context. /nt J Ment Health Addiction 2021. 3
288 Practice Committee of American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Current 320 Trott M, Jackson SE, Firth J, et a/. Exercise addiction prevalence and correlates in the a
evaluation of Amenorrhea. Fertil Steril 2008;90:5219-25. absence of eating disorder Symptomology: A systematic review and meta-analysis. / ne
289 Hooper DR, Tenforde AS, Hackney AC. Treating exercise-associated low testosterone Addict Med 2020; 14:e321-9. 8
and its related symptoms. Phys Sportsmed 2018;46:427-34. 321 Lewiecki EM, Binkley N, Morgan SL, et a/. Best practices for dual-energy X-ray e
290 Elliott-Sale KJ, Tenforde AS, Parziale AL, et al. Endocrine effects of relative energy absorptiometry measurement and reporting: International society for clinical S
deficiency in sport. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018;28:335-49. densitometry guidance. J Clin Densitom 2016;19:127—-40. 3
291 Hackney AC, Aggon E. Chronic low testosterone levels in endurance trained men: the 322 Drezner JA, Sharma S, Baggish A, et a/. International criteria for 2
exercise- hypogonadal male condition. J Biochem Physiol 2018; 1:103. electrocardiographic interpretation in athletes: consensus statement. Br J Sports °
292 Hoenig T, Ackerman KE, Beck BR, et a/. Bone stress injuries. Nat Rev Dis Primers Med 2017;51:704-31. =)
2022;8:26. 323 Palma J-A, Kaufmann H. Management of orthostatic hypotension. Continuum ® S
293 Jonvik KL, Torstveit MK, Sundgot-Borgen JK, et a/. Last word on viewpoint: do we (Minneap Minn) 2020;26:154-77. on
need to change the guideline values for determining low bone mineral density in 324 Johnson ML, Pipes L, Veldhuis PP, et a/. AutoDecon, a deconvolution algorithm es
athletes? J Appl Physiol (1985) 2022;132:1325-6. for identification and characterization of luteinizing hormone Secretory bursts: og
294 Hornberger LL, Lane MA, Committee on Adolescence. Identification and description and validation using synthetic data. Anal Biochem 2008;381:8-17. c 3
management of eating disorders in children and adolescents. Pediatrics 325 Bhasin S, Cunningham GR, Hayes FJ, et a/. Testosterone therapy in men with 32
2021;147:e2020040279. androgen deficiency syndromes: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J Zn
295 Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine. Medical management of restrictive Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010;95:2536-59. 2S
eating disorders in adolescents and young adults. J Adolesc Health 2022;71:648-54. 326 Arver S, Lehtihet M. Current guidelines for the diagnosis of testosterone deficiency. 30
296 Association AP. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). 22 Front Horm Res 2009;37:5-20. cy iw]
May 2013. 327 O'Donnell J, McCluskey P, Stellingwerff T. Ovulation monitoring protocol: Canadian & 2
297 Schaefer LM, Smith KE, Leonard R, et a/. Identifying a male clinical cutoff Sport Institute — Pacific; 2022. us
on the eating disorder examination-questionnaire (EDE-Q). Int J Eat Disord 328 Lundy B, Torstveit MK, Stenqvist TB, et a/. Screening for low energy availability in 3 S
2018;51:1357-60. male athletes: attempted validation of LEAM-Q. Nutrients 1873; 14:1873 O &
298 Mond JM, Hay PJ, Rodgers B, et a/. Validity of the Eating Disorder Examination 329 Morley JE, Charlton E, Patrick P, et a/. Validation of a screening questionnaire for e Q
Questionnaire (EDE-Q) in screening for eating disorders in community samples. androgen deficiency in aging males. Metabolism 2000;49:1239-42. o =
Behav Res Ther 2004;42:551-67. 330 Shuhart CR, Yeap SS, Anderson PA, et a/. Executive summary of the 2019 ISCD &: 3
299 Hussain AA, Hilbel C, Hindborg M, et al. Increased lipid and lipoprotein position development conference on monitoring treatment, DXA cross-calibration oa
concentrations in anorexia nervosa: a systematic review and meta-analysis. /nt J Fat and least significant change, spinal cord injury, peri-prosthetic and orthopedic bone 3 i
Disord 2019;52:611-29. health, Transgender medicine, and pediatrics. J Clin Densitom 2019;22:453-71. ac
300 Kenny B, Orellana L, Fuller-Tyszkiewicz M, et a/. Depression and eating disorders in 331 Gaskell SK, Burgell R, Wiklendt L, et a/. Impact of exercise duration on $s
early adolescence: A network analysis approach. Int J Eat Disord 2021;54:2143-54. gastrointestinal function and symptoms. J App! Physiol (1985) 2023;134:160-71 me
301 Tan JOA, Calitri R, Bloodworth A, et a/. Understanding eating disorders in elite 332 Gaskell SK, Burgell R, Wiklendt L, et a/. Does Exertional heat stress impact fon
gymnastics: ethical and conceptual challenges. Clin Sports Med 2016;35:275-92. gastrointestinal function and symptoms? J Sci Med Sport 2022;25:960-7. 2
302 McKay AKA, Pyne DB, Burke LM, et a/. Iron metabolism: interactions with energy and 333. Nullens S, Nelsen T, Camilleri M, et a/. Regional colon transit in patients with 8
carbohydrate availability. Nutrients 2020;12:3692. dys-synergic defaecation or slow transit in patients with constipation. Gut 3
303 Finn EE, Tenforde AS, Fredericson M, et al. Markers of low-iron status are associated 2012;61:1132-9. o
with female athlete Triad risk factors. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2021;53:1969-74. 334 Gaskell SK, Rauch CE, Costa RJS. Gastrointestinal assessment and therapeutic f=)
304 Petkus DL, Murray-Kolb LE, De Souza MJ. The unexplored crossroads of the female intervention for the management of exercise-associated gastrointestinal synptoms: S
athlete triad and iron deficiency: a narrative review. Sports Med 2017;47:1721-37. a case series Translational and professional practice approach. Front Physiol <
305 De Souza MJ, Miller BE, Loucks AB, et a/. High frequency of Luteal phase deficiency 2021;12:719142. g
and Anovulation in recreational women runners: blunted elevation in Follicle- 335 Gaskell SK, Rauch CE, Parr A, et a/. Diurnal versus nocturnal exercise—effect on the “4
stimulating hormone observed during Luteal-follicular transition. J Clin Endocrinol gastrointestinal tract. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2021;53:1056-67. il
Metab 1998;83:4220-32. 336 Cohen LB, Field SP, Sachar DB. The superior mesenteric artery syndrome. The disease oS
306 Elliott-Sale K, Ross E, Burden R, et a/. The BASES expert statement on conducting that isn’t, or is it? J Clin Gastroenterol 1985;7:113-6. 'S
and implementing female athlete-based research. Sport Exerc Sci 2020;65:6-7. 337 Neri S, Signorelli SS, Mondati E, et a/. Ultrasound imaging in diagnosis of superior S
307 O'Donnell J, McCluskey WTP, Stellingwerff T. Ovulation monitoring protocol. mesenteric artery syndrome. J Intern Med 2005;257:346-51. &
Available: http://www.csipacific.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/CSI-Pacific- 338 Unal B, Aktas A, Kemal G, et a/. Superior mesenteric artery syndrome: CT and 2
Ovuation-Protocol-20220921.pdf2022 [Accessed 13 Sep 2022]. Ultrasonography findings. Diagn Interv Radiol 2005;11:90-5. vu
308 Mattheus HK, Wagner C, Becker K, et a/. Incontinence and constipation in adolescent 339 Mouli VP, Ahuja V. Questionnaire based gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) g
patients with anorexia Nervosa-results of a multicenter study from a German web- assessment scales. Indian J Gastroenterol 2011;30:108-17. 2
based registry for children and adolescents with anorexia nervosa. /nt J Eat Disord 340 Jones R, Junghard 0, Dent J, et a/. Development of the GerdQ, a tool for the c
2020;53:219-28. diagnosis and management of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease in primary care. @
309 Pires T, Pires P, Moreira H, et a/. Prevalence of urinary Incontinence in high-impact Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2009;30:1030-8. os
sport athletes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Hum Kinet 2020;73:279-88. 341 Agachan F, Chen T, Pfeifer J, et a/. A constipation scoring system to simplify g
310 Norris ML, Harrison ME, Isserlin L, et a/. Gastrointestinal complications associated evaluation and management of constipated patients. Dis Colon Rectum s
with anorexia nervosa: a systematic review. Int J Eat Disord 2016;49:216-37. 1996;39:681-5. S

311 Schofield KL, Thorpe H, Sims ST. Resting metabolic rate prediction equations and 342 Lewis SJ, Heaton KW. Stool form scale as a useful guide to intestinal transit time. :
the validity to assess energy deficiency in the athlete population. Exp Physiol Scand J Gastroenterol 1997;32:920-4. =~
2019;104:469-75. 343 Mearin F, Lacy BE, Chang L, et a/. Bowel disorders. Gastroenterology 2016. =
ps D
Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 1095 ay
=

Consensus statement e

wn

344 Ozawa Y, Shimizu T, Shishiba Y. Elevation of serum aminotransferase as a sign 372. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JBW, et a/. A brief measure for assessing generalized 8

of Multiorgan-disorders in severely emaciated anorexia Nervosa. /ntern Med anxiety disorder: the GAD-7. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166:1092-7. a

1998;37:32-9. 373 Halson SL, Appaneal RN, Welvaert M, et a/. Stressed and not sleeping: poor sleep =

345 Singhal V, de Lourdes Eguiguren M, Eisenbach L, et a/. Body composition, and psychological stress in elite athletes prior to the Rio 2016 Olympic games. Int J Q

hemodynamic, and biochemical parameters of young female normal-weight Sports Physiol Perform 2022;17:195-202. op

oligo-amenorrheic and eumenorrheic athletes and Nonathletes. Ann Nutr Metab 374 Henry JD, Crawford JR. The short-form version of the depression anxiety stress scales >

2014;65:264-71. (DASS-21): construct validity and normative data in a large non-clinical sample. Br J BS

346  Sileri P, Franceschilli L, De Lorenzo A, et al. Defecatory disorders in anorexia nervosa: Clin Psychol 2005;44:227-39. =

a clinical study. Tech Coloproctol 2014; 18:439-44. 375 Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. J Health o

347 Reilly TW, Talley NJ, Pemberton JH, et a/. Validation of a questionnaire to assess fecal Soc Behav 1983;24:385-96. a

Incontinence and associated risk factors: fecal Incontinence questionnaire. Dis Colon 376 Terry PC, Lane AM, Lane HJ, et a/. Development and validation of a mood measure 2

Rectum 2000;43:146-53. for adolescents. J Sports Sci 1999;17:861-72 o

348 Rockwood TH, Church JM, Fleshman JW, et a/. Patient and surgeon ranking of the 377 McNair DM. Profile of mood states. Educational and industrial testing service; 1992. 2

severity of symptoms associated with fecal Incontinence: the fecal Incontinence 378 Terry PC, Lane AM, Fogarty GJ. Construct validity of the profile of mood States— =)

severity index. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:1525-32. adolescents for use with adults. Psychol Sport Exerc 2003;4:125-39. =

349 Altomare DF, Spazzafumo L, Rinaldi M, et a/. Set-up and statistical validation 379 Fairburn CG, Cooper Z, O'Connor M. Eating Disorder Examination (Edition 16.0D). 8

of a new scoring system for obstructed defaecation syndrome. Colorectal Dis New York: Guilford Press, 2008. c

2008; 10:84-8 380 Lichtenstein MB, Haastrup L, Johansen KK, et a/. Validation of the eating disorder a

350 Abraham S, Kellow JE. Do the digestive tract symptoms in eating disorder patients examination questionnaire in Danish eating disorder patients and athletes. J Clin 3

represent functional gastrointestinal disorders? BMC Gastroenterol 2013; 13:38. Med 2021;10:3976. a

351. Gaskell SK, Snipe RMJ, Costa RJS. Test—retest reliability of a modified visual analog 381 Darcy AM, Hardy KK, Crosby RD, et a/. Factor structure of the Eating Disorder ne

scale assessment tool for determining incidence and severity of gastrointestinal Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q) in male and female college athletes. Body Image 8

symptoms in response to exercise stress. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2013;10:399-405. e

2019;29:411-9. 382 Martinsen M, Holme |, Pensgaard AM, et a/. The development of the brief eating S

352 Costa RJS, Young P, Gill SK, et a/. Assessment of exercise-associated gastrointestinal disorder in athletes questionnaire. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2014;46:1666-75. 3

perturbations in research and practical settings: methodological concerns and 383 Garner DM. Eating disorder inventory-3 (EDI-3). Professional manual. Odessa, FL: 2

recommendations for best practice. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2022;32:387-418. Psychological Assessment Resources, 2004. °

353 tuszczki E, Jagielski P, Bartosiewicz A, et a/. The LEAF questionnaire is a good 384 Allen KL, Byrne SM, Hii H, et a/. Neurocognitive functioning in adolescents with 3

screening tool for the identification of the female athlete Triad/relative energy eating disorders: a population-based study. Cogn Neuropsychiatry 2013;18:355-75. ® S

deficiency in sport among young football players. Peer/ 2021;9:e12118. 385 Golden CJ, Freshwater SM. Stroop color and word test: a manual for clinical and on

354 Pfeiffer B, Cotterill A, Grathwohl D, et a/. The effect of carbohydrate Gels on experimental uses. Wood Dale, Illinois: Stoelting Company, 1978. a fy

gastrointestinal tolerance during a 16-km run. /nt J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 386 Brooks S, Prince A, Stahl D, et a/. A systematic review and meta-analysis of cognitive og

2009; 19:485-503. bias to food stimuli in people with disordered eating behaviour. Clin Psychol Rev c 3

355 Costa RJS, Miall A, Khoo A, et a/. Gut-training: the impact of two weeks repetitive 2011;31:37-51. S 3

gut-challenge during exercise on gastrointestinal status, glucose availability, fuel 387 Stott N, Fox JRE, Williams MO. Attentional bias in eating disorders: a Meta-Review. Zn

Kinetics, and running performance. App! Physiol Nutr Metab 2017;42:547-57. Int J Eat Disord 2021;54:1377-99. 2S

356 Ackerman KE, Slusarz K, Guereca G, et a/. Higher ghrelin and lower leptin 388 Fagundo AB, de la Torre R, Jiménez-Murcia S, et a/. Executive functions profile in 30

secretion are associated with lower LH secretion in young amenorrheic athletes extreme eating/weight conditions: from anorexia nervosa to obesity. PLoS ONE So

compared with eumenorrheic athletes and controls. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2012;7:e43382. & 2

2012;302:E800-6. 389 Bechara A, Damasio H, Tranel D, et a/. Deciding advantageously before knowing the us

357 Schorr M, Lawson EA, Dichtel LE, et a/. Cortisol measures across the weight advantageous strategy. Science 1997;275:1293-5 3 S

spectrum. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015;100:3313-21. 390 Delis DC, Kramer JH, Kaplan E, et al. California verbal learning test: Assessment. San O &

358 Mirtschin JG, Forbes SF Cato LE, et a/. Organization of dietary control for nutrition- Antonio: The Psychological Corporation, 2000. e Q

training intervention involving Periodized carbohydrate availability and Ketogenic 391 Ciszewski S, Flood KE, Proctor CJ, et a/. Exploring the relationship between o =

low-carbohydrate high-fat diet. /nt J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018;28:480-9. disordered eating and executive function in a non-clinical sample. Percept Mot Skills Z. 3

359 Alcantara JMA, Galgani JE, Jurado-Fasoli L, et a/. Validity of four commercially 2020;127:1033-50. 2 =>

available metabolic carts for assessing resting metabolic rate and respiratory 392 Walsh NP, Halson SL, Sargent C, ef a/. Sleep and the athlete: narrative review and 3 i

exchange ratio in non-ventilated humans. Clin Nutr 2022;41:746-54. 2021 expert consensus recommendations. Br J Sports Med 2021;55:356-68. ac

360 Schmidt W, Prommer N. Impact of alterations in total hemoglobin mass on VO 2Max. 393 Samuels C, James L, Lawson D, et a/. The Athlete Sleep Screening Questionnaire: $s

Exerc Sport Sci Rev 2010;38:68-75. a new tool for assessing and managing sleep in elite athletes. Br J Sports Med me

361 Schmidt W, Prommer N. The Optimised CO-Rebreathing method: a new tool to 2016;50:418-22. fon

determine total Haemoglobin mass routinely. Fur J App! Physiol 2005;95:486-95. 394 Driller MW, Mah CD, Halson SL. Development of the athlete sleep behavior Fs

362 Mannino RG, Myers DR, Tyburski EA, et al. Smartphone App for non-invasive questionnaire: a tool for identifying maladaptive sleep practices in elite athletes. 8

detection of anemia using only patient-Sourced photos. Nat Commun 2018;9:4924. Sleep Sci 2018;11:37—-44. 3

363 Harvey MA, Versi E. Predictive value of clinical evaluation of stress urinary 395 Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime Sleepiness: the Epworth Sleepiness o

Incontinence: a summary of the published literature. /nt Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor scale. Sleep 1991;14:540-5. |

Dysfunct 2001;12:31-7. 396 Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF 3rd, Monk TH, et a/. The Pittsburgh sleep quality S

364 Brown JS, Bradley CS, Subak LL, et a/. The sensitivity and specificity of a simple index: a new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res <

test to distinguish between urge and stress urinary Incontinence. Ann Intern Med 1989;28:193-213. g

2006; 144:715-23. 397 Gagnon C, Bélanger L, Ivers H, et a/. Validation of the insomnia severity index in “4

365 Giagio S, Salvioli S, Innocenti T, et al. PFD-SENTINEL: development of a screening primary care. J Am Board Fam Med 2013;26:701-10. il

tool for pelvic floor dysfunction in female athletes through an international Delphi 398 Miller DJ, Sargent C, Roach GD. A validation of six wearable devices for estimating oS

consensus. Br J Sports Med 2023;57:899-905. sleep, heart rate and heart rate variability in healthy adults. Sensors (Basel) 'S

366 Laughlin GA, Dominguez CE, Yen SS. Nutritional and endocrine-metabolic 2022;22:6317. S

aberrations in women with functional hypothalamic Amenorrhea. J Clin Endocrinol 399 Freeman R, Wieling W, Axelrod FB, ef a/. Consensus statement on the definition of BSS

Metab 1998;83:25-32. orthostatic hypotension, Neurally mediated syncope and the postural tachycardia 2

367 Bowler A-L, Whitfield J, Marshall L, ef a/. The use of continuous glucose monitors syndrome. Clin Auton Res 2011;21:69-72. vu

in sport: possible applications and considerations. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 400 Kiss O, Sydé N, Vargha P, et a/. Detailed heart rate variability analysis in athletes. Clin g

2023;33:121-32. Auton Res 2016;26:245-52. o

368 American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical Manual of mental 401 Sammito S, Bockelmann I. Reference values for Time- and frequency-domain heart c

disorders: DSM-5-TR5th edn. American Psychiatric Association Publishing, 18 March rate variability measures. Heart Rhythm 2016; 13:1309-16. @

2022. 402 La Rovere MT, Mortara A, Schwartz PJ. Baroreflex sensitivity. J Cardiovasc os

369 Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression severity Electrophysiol 1995;6:761-74. g

measure. J Gen Intern Med 2001;16:606-13. 403 Thijssen DHJ, Bruno RM, van Mil A, et a/. Expert consensus and evidence-based s

370 Radloff LS. The CES-D scale: a self-report depression scale for research in the general recommendations for the assessment of flow-mediated dilation in humans. Eur S
population. App! Psychol Meas 1977;1:385-401. Heart J 2019;40:2534-47. :

371 Beck A, Steer R, Brown G. BDI-II, Beck depression inventory: manual. San Antonio, 404 Gillinov S, Etiwy M, Wang R, et al. Variable accuracy of wearable heart rate monitors =~

TX: Psychological Corp, 1996: 601-8. during aerobic exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2017;49:1697-703. =

ps D

1096 Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073—-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 ay

=

Consensus statement e

wn

405 Gilgen-Ammann R, Schweizer T, Wyss T. RR interval signal quality of a heart 428 Hooper SL, Mackinnon LT, Howard A, et al. Markers for monitoring Overtraining and 8
rate monitor and an ECG Holter at rest and during exercise. Fur J Appl Physiol recovery. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1995;27:106-12. a
2019;119:1525-32. 429 Baird MF, Graham SM, Baker JS, et a/. Creatine-Kinase- and exercise-related =

406 Alugubelli N, Abuissa H, Roka A. Wearable devices for remote monitoring of heart muscle damage implications for muscle performance and recovery. J Nutr Metab Q
rate and heart rate variability-what we know and what is coming. Sensors (Basel) 2012;2012:960363.
2022;22:8903. 430 SawA€, Main LC, Gastin PB. Monitoring the athlete training response: subjective >

407 Biolo G, Maggi SP, Williams BD, et a/. Increased rates of muscle protein turnover self-reported measures Trump commonly used objective measures: a systematic BS
and amino acid transport after resistance exercise in humans. Am J Physiol review. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:281-91. ‘=
1995;268(3 Pt 1):£514-20. 431 Seshadri DR, Li RT, Voos JE, et a/. Wearable sensors for monitoring the internal and o

408 Wilkinson DJ, Franchi MV, Brook MS, et a/. A validation of the application of external workload of the athlete. NPJ Digit Med 2019;2:71. a
D(2)0 stable Isotope Tracer techniques for monitoring day-to-day changes in 432 Robertson SJ, Burnett AF Cochrane J. Tests examining skill outcomes in sport: 2
muscle protein Subfraction synthesis in humans. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab a systematic review of measurement properties and feasibility. Sports Med ©
2014;306:E571-9. 2014;44:501-18. 2

409 MacDonald AJ, Small AC, Greig CA, et a/. A novel oral Tracer procedure for 433 Bian C, AliA, Nassis GP, et a/. Repeated interval Loughborough soccer passing tests: =)
measurement of habitual Myofibrillar protein synthesis. Rapid Commun Mass an ecologically valid motor task to induce mental fatigue in soccer. Front Physiol =
Spectrom 2013;27:1769-77. 2021;12:803528. S

410 Greene J, Louis J, Korostynska 0, et a/. State-of-the-art methods for Skeletal muscle 434 Janicijevic D, Garcia-Ramos A. Feasibility of Volitional reaction time tests in athletes: c
Glycogen analysis in athletes-the need for novel non-invasive techniques. Biosensors A systematic review. Motor Control 2022;26:291-314. a
(Basel) 2017;7:11. 435. Lonsdale C, Hodge K, Rose EA. The behavioral regulation in sport questionnaire ES

411 Casey A, Mann R, Banister K, et a/. Effect of carbohydrate ingestion on Glycogen (BRSQ): instrument development and initial validity evidence. J Sport Exerc Psychol a
Resynthesis in human liver and Skeletal muscle, measured by (13)C MRS. Am J 2008;30:323-55. D>
Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2000;278:E65-75. 436 Bhavsar N, Bartholomew KJ, Quested E, et a/. Measuring psychological need 8

412 Mehta NM, Corkins MR, Lyman B, et al. Defining pediatric malnutrition: a States in sport: theoretical considerations and a new measure. Psychol Sport Exerc Y
paradigm shift toward etiology-related definitions. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2020;47:101617. S
2013;37:460-81. 437 Raedeke TD, Smith AL. Development and preliminary validation of an athlete burnout 3

413 Misra M, Miller KK, Bjornson J, et a/. Alterations in growth hormone Secretory measure. J Sport Exerc Psychol 2001;23:281-306. 2
Dynamics in adolescent girls with anorexia Nervosa and effects on bone metabolism. 438 Maslach C, Jackson SE. The measurement of experienced burnout. J Organiz Behav °

J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003;88:5615-23. 1981;2:99-113. =)

414 Katznelson L, Laws ER, Melmed S, et a/. Acromegaly: an endocrine society clinical 439 Brown M, Avers D. Worthingham’s muscle testing techniques of manual examination ® S
practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2014;99:3933-51. and performance testing. 2018. on

415 Walsh NP. Nutrition and athlete immune health: new perspectives on an old 440 Gleeson NP, Mercer TH. The utility of Isokinetic Dynamometry in the assessment of es
paradigm. Sports Med 2019;49(Suppl 2):153-68. human muscle function. Sports Med 1996;21:18-34. og

416 Bahr R, Clarsen B, Derman W, et a/. International Olympic committee consensus 441 Dvir Z, Miller S. Multiple-joint Isokinetic dynamometry: a critical review. J Strength = 3
statement: methods for recording and reporting of Epidemiological data on injury Cond Res 2020;34:587-601 32

and illness in sport 2020 (including STROBE extension for sport injury and illness 442 Faigenbaum AD, McFarland JE, Herman RE, et a/. Reliability of the one-repetition- Zn
surveillance (STROBE-SIIS)). Br J Sports Med 2020;54:372-89. maximum power clean test in adolescent athletes. J Strength Cond Res D 8

417 Hopkins WG. Measures of reliability in sports medicine and science. Sports Med 2012;26:432-7. 30
2000;30:1-15. 443 Benton MJ, Raab S, Waggener GT. Effect of training status on reliability of one So

418 Capostagno B, Lambert MI, Lamberts RP. A systematic review of Submaximal cycle repetition maximum testing in women. J Strength Cond Res 2013;27:1885-90. & 2
tests to predict, monitor, and optimize Cycling performance. /nt J Sports Physiol 444 Bassett DR Jr, Howley ET, Thompson DL, et a/. Validity of Inspiratory and Expiratory us
Perform 2016;11:707-14. methods of measuring gas exchange with a computerized system. J App/ Physiol 3 S

419  Stellingwerff 7, Heikura IA, Meeusen R, et a/. Overtraining syndrome (OTS) and (1985) 2001;91:218-24. oO 2
relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S): shared pathways, symptoms and 445 Messonnier LA, Emhoff C-AW, Fattor JA, et a/. Lactate Kinetics at the lactate e Q
complexities. Sports Med 2021;51:2251-80. threshold in trained and untrained men. J App/ Physiol (1985) 2013;114:1593-602. a =

420 Beneke R, Leithauser RM, Ochentel O. Blood lactate diagnostics in exercise testing 446 Penry JT, Wilcox AR, Yun J. Validity and reliability analysis of Cooper's 12-minute Z. 3
and training. /nt J Sports Physiol Perform 2011;6:8-24. run and the multistage shuttle run in healthy adults. / Strength Cond Res oa

421 Goodwin ML, Harris JE, Hernandez A, et a/. Blood lactate measurements 2011;25:597-605. 50} i
and analysis during exercise: a guide for Clinicians. J Diabetes Sci Technol 447 Aziz AR, Chia MYH, Teh KC. Measured maximal oxygen uptake in a multi-stage Ss. =
2007;1:558-69. shuttle test and treadmill-run test in trained athletes. J Sports Med Phys Fitness $s

422. Snyder A, Jeukendrup A, Hesselink M, et al. A physiological/psychological indicator of 2005;45:306-14. me
over-reaching during intensive training. Int J Sports Med 1993;14:29-32. 448 lannetta D, Fontana FY, Maturana FM, et a/. An equation to predict the maximal fom

423 Tanskanen MM, Kyrélainen H, Uusitalo AL, et a/. Serum sex hormone-binding lactate steady state from ramp-incremental exercise test data in Cycling. J Sci Med Fs
globulin and Cortisol concentrations are associated with Overreaching during Sport 2018;21:1274-80. 8
strenuous military training. J Strength Cond Res 2011;25:787-97. 449 Bat-Or O. The Wingate anaerobic test an update on methodology, Reliability and 3

424 Schaal K, Van Loan MD, Casazza GA. Reduced catecholamine response to exercise in validity. Sports Med 1987;4:381-94. o
Amenortheic athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2011;43:34—43. 450 Krishnan A, Sharma D, Bhatt M, et a/. Comparison between standing broad jump f=)

425  Darpolor MM, Singh M, Covington J, et a/. Molecular correlates of MRS-Based test and Wingate test for assessing lower limb anaerobic power in elite sportsmen. Zz
3! Phosphocreatine muscle Resynthesis rate in healthy adults. NMR Biomed Med J Armed Forces India 2017;73:140-5. 2
2021;34:e4402. 451 Moresi MP, Bradshaw EJ, Greene D, et a/. The assessment of adolescent female g

426 Markus |, Constantini K, Hoffman JR, et a/. Exercise-induced muscle damage: athletes using standing and reactive long jumps. Sports Biomech 2011;10:73-84. “4
mechanism, assessment and nutritional factors to accelerate recovery. Eur J App! 452 Bosco C, Komi PV, Tihanyi J, et a/. Mechanical power test and fiber composition of il
Physiol 2021;121:969-92. human leg Extensor muscles. Fur J App! Physiol Occup Physiol 1983;51:129-35. oS

427 Kellmann M, Kallus KW. Recovery-stress questionnaire for athletes: User manual: 453 Sands WA, McNeal JR, Ochi MT, et a/. Comparison of the Wingate and Bosco 'S
Human Kinetics. 2001. anaerobic tests. J Strength Cond Res 2004;18:810—5. Ss

£&

o

u

(c)

a

)

Cc

D

oO

a

o

iN)

oO

oO

oe

cE

(o}

is)

=

Mountjoy M, et al. Br J Sports Med 2024;57:1073-1098. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994 1097 ay
=

Correction: 2023 International Olympic Committee's (IOC)
consensus statement on Relative Energy Deficiency in
Sport (REDs)
Mountjoy M, Ackerman KE, Bailey DM, et al. 2023 International Olympic Committee’s
(LOC) consensus statement on Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport (REDs). Br J Sports Med
2023;57:1073-1097

Figure 6 and online supplementary file 5 have been updated. This has been updated in the
online version only and not in print.

doi:10.1136/bjsports-2023-1 06 994
© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. No commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.
Br J Sports Med 2024;58:e4. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994corr1

BM) Br J Sports Med February 2024 Vol 58 No 3 eas 1of1

