Gladwell et al. Extreme Physiology & Medicine 2013, 2:3 .
http://www.extremephysiolmed.com/content/2/1/3 a | Extreme Physiology
__ VY & Medicine
The great outdoors: how a green exercise
environment can benefit all
Valerie F Gladwell”, Daniel K Brown, Carly Wood, Gavin R Sandercock and Jo L Barton
Abstract
The studies of human and environment interactions usually consider the extremes of environment on individuals or
how humans affect the environment. It is well known that physical activity improves both physiological and
psychological well-being, but further evidence is required to ascertain how different environments influence and
shape health. This review considers the declining levels of physical activity, particularly in the Western world, and
how the environment may help motivate and facilitate physical activity. It also addresses the additional
physiological and mental health benefits that appear to occur when exercise is performed in an outdoor
environment. However, people’s connectedness to nature appears to be changing and this has important
implications as to how humans are now interacting with nature. Barriers exist, and it is important that these are
considered when discussing how to make exercise in the outdoors accessible and beneficial for all. The synergistic
combination of exercise and exposure to nature and thus the ‘great outdoors’ could be used as a powerful tool to
help fight the growing incidence of both physical inactivity and non-communicable disease.
Keywords: Green exercise, Physiology, Natural environment, Physical activity, Motivation, Health
Review supported this belief, demonstrating an association be-
Background tween improved health outcomes and amount of sur-
Most discussions of human interactions with the envi- rounding ‘green space’ [3,4]. Subsequently, how and why
ronment concern the potential challenges they place on _ the great outdoors may elicit health benefits has become
one another. These usually concern the extreme envi- a focal point for research.
ronmental demands such as those seen at high altitude, Our hunter-gatherer ancestors existed with the outdoor
at depth or in extremes of temperature. Alternatively, natural environment for thousands of years, and it is
they express the growing human population’s ongoing hypothesised that this provides present day humans with
tendency to negatively influence the delicate balance of an innate affiliation with nature [5]. In addition, nature
nature, which developed for millions of years prior to provides an environment that does not require our direct
our evolutionary invasion. attention, giving nature restorative properties therefore
With the multiplicity of the ‘great outdoors’ including allowing recovery from mental fatigue [6] and attention
forests, seaside, countryside, parks, local green areas and restoration [7]. Although in the Western world, less
even gardens, another conversation considers the role of _ people are involved in the natural environment on a daily
environment in benefiting human health. Green or na- __ basis, in particular reduced numbers working on the land,
tural spaces have been considered to be advantageous many people seek out nature and undertake outdoor re-
for health for many years. For example, in the UK during _creational activities. Currently, there is an increasing trend
the 19th century Industrial Revolution, wealthy philan- for people to undertake outdoor endurance challenges
thropists developed urban parks for the benefit of the but, paradoxically, there is a greater proportion of the
public’s health, and hospital gardens were considered an _ population with insufficient physical activity levels to meet
important addition for their believed healing properties current health guidelines [8]. Recent reviews indicate that
{1,2]. A study in the early 21st century has further exercising outdoors appears to be more beneficial to men-
tal health over indoor activities [9] and furthermore, na-
* Correspondence: vglad@essex.ac.uk tural environments have a greater impact on psychological
School of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK
© 2013 Gladwell et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
(@) BioMed Central Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Gladwell et al. Extreme Physiology & Medicine 2013, 2:3 Page 2 of 7
http://www.extremephysiolmed.com/content/2/1/3
health especially when exercise is incorporated [10]. To undertaken outdoors. Due to rapid urbanisation and
describe this potential synergistic benefit to health that nearly half of the world’s population living in urban
occurs when exercising whilst being exposed to nature, areas [21], less green space and quality green space is
the term ‘green exercise’ was adopted in 2003 [11] and available in which undertake physical activity or sport.
published through peer-review in 2005 [12].
Pretty et al. [11] demonstrated that green exercise can Green spaces, physical activity and health
improve mental well-being and markers of physiological The decline in physical activity is resulting in huge
health. There is subsequent preliminary evidence at increases in physical disability and disease [22] and a ri-
physiological [13-15], psychological [9,16,17], biochem- sing number of cases of mental ill-health [23]. It is es-
ical [18] and social levels [17], which suggests that green __ sential, therefore, to find ways of engaging all individuals
exercise might have a useful role in primary and second- _to improve health and prevent further increases in non-
ary prevention of disease. Moreover, there is evidence to communicable diseases. The use of outdoor natural
suggest a role for green exercise in rehabilitation pro- environments for physical activity and health is not new.
grammes [17]. In addition, engaging sedentary indivi- For 99% of human history, not only we have lived off the
duals in green exercise could be an effective vehicle in land and sought nature for basic survival needs and
driving behavioural change by improving adherence health, but also for pleasure and physical activity. More
rates to exercise programmes [19]. There is still a need _ recently climbers, hill-walkers, mountain bikers and en-
to investigate the mechanisms behind observed health durance athletes have all enjoyed the great outdoors and
benefits of the natural environment [9,10]. A greater green spaces. It may not only facilitate enjoyment for
understanding of how nature positively interacts with participants and improve adherence [19], but may also
human socio-biology may be mutually beneficial to both encourage positive physical activity behaviours which are
health and the environment. likely to produce greater health gains. As we maybe still
The focus of this paper is to identify literature regard- _ genetically designed to be hunter-gatherers in the great
ing physiological changes which occur as a product of outdoors, we are not being stimulated physically or men-
participating in green exercise. Additionally, the likely tally in the same way and this may be detrimental to
interaction between these physiological changes and the _ health. One hypothesis suggests that we are all born with
well-documented psychological alterations will be dis- an emotional affiliation for other living organisms, i.e.
cussed with regard to their potential health benefits. Fur- _ nature loving [5], which may mean as part of our genetic
thermore, the impact that the great outdoors may have on makeup we are innately predisposed to desire nature
exercise adherence and motivation to exercise will be contact, and thus maybe green exercise should be used
explored in the context of increasing physical activity to facilitate physical activity to improve health.
levels. Therefore the aims of the review are the following:
Green exercise, perception of effort, motivation and
1. Outline the declining physical activity levels in the behaviour change
Western world and how the ‘green’ environment may Although green exercise is perceived to boost health and
help to decrease perception of effort and improve this can be used as a powerful extrinsic motivation for
motivation to increase physical activity levels exercise, not everyone will be motivated by this. People
2. Discuss the impact of green exercise on physiological are motivated to exercise for many different reasons
and psychological markers of health and whether [24]. Some are extrinsically driven by external factors in-
these impacts are enhanced by the green cluding what others may think of them, whilst others are
environment intrinsically driven, maybe due to the enjoyment or the
3. Explore the mechanisms that are attributed to green excitement of the challenge. Others engage for health
exercise for improvements to health and benefits, whereas some may take part for the social as-
4. Discuss the consequences of the disengagement with pect. The promotion of the social and entertainment
nature and its impact on health. benefits of physical activity appear to be more successful
than those promoting health benefits to persuade indivi-
Declining physical activity levels duals to partake in physical activity [25]. Green exercise
Worldwide, 31.1% of adults are physically inactive [20]. _ may help motivation to undertake physical activity by in-
Some of the decline is attributed to technological creasing enjoyment and escapism from everyday life,
advances through the agricultural and industrial revolu- with both a social and entertainment value.
tions, and more recently, digital revolution. The focus of There is even some evidence to suggest that exercise
much structured physical activity in the developed world may feel easier when performed in the natural environ-
has also shifted indoors to gymnasia, sports halls, and to ment. When allowed to self-select walking speed, partici-
within the home; proportionally less physical activity is pants tend actually to walk faster outdoors, compared to

Gladwell et al. Extreme Physiology & Medicine 2013, 2:3 Page 3 of 7
http://www.extremephysiolmed.com/content/2/1/3
indoors. Paradoxically, they report a lower rating of per- _ to work at higher workloads, which may help to increase
ceived exertion [26]. the amount of physical activity undertaken and moti-

When asked to reproduce a given level of perceived vation to continue. However, there is a dearth of studies
exertion indoors and outdoors, individuals tend to walk that have investigated whether physical activity levels
faster at a greater physiological effort (verified by heart (duration and frequency) are altered by the exercise
rate and blood lactate), suggesting they perceive exercise environment.
to be less demanding when performed in the natural en- The restorative properties of an environment appear
vironment [27]. A recent paper by members of our re- to mediate the frequency of physical activity [19], but
search group [28] explored the impact of colour in a most studies focus simply on the relationship between
video which simulated cycling within a natural environ- _ percentage of green space (usually surrounding housing)
ment. Participants cycled for 5 min in three different and physical activity levels. While one European study
conditions: an unedited video (predominantly showing __ reported that individuals living in a greener environment
green foliage), the same video but with a red filter, and were three times more likely to be physically active with
the same video with no colour. Interestingly, despite the a 40% lower chance of being overweight or obese [32],
video images all being the same apart from the colour, other authors have reported no association between the
the rate of perceived exertion was decreased in the normal quantity of immediate green space and self-reported
image compared to the other two conditions. Further- levels of physical activity [33,34]. The limitation of the
more, total positive mood was increased (as mentioned majority of studies is the paucity of information regard-
later in the green exercise and health section). This po- _ing participants’ actual use of local green space, the per-
tentially provides support for the first time that ‘green- ceived quality or even access to green space. Access to
ness’ is an important component of alterations that are green space has been shown to be important for mental
seen. There were no differences in physiological mar- health and is associated with longevity and decreased
kers, e.g. heart rate and oxygen consumption. risk of mental illness in Japan [35], Scandinavia [36] and

Perception of effort is highly complex, comprising the Netherlands [37]. Access also improves perception
multiple components [29]. Perception of effort during of general health [38,39] and quality of life in ageing
exercise comprises input from the brain and integration populations [40]. The quality of the green space may
of information from the feed-forward centre. The latter, also be associated with health as the biodiversity (i.e.
particularly, may be influenced by mood and anxiety. range of species of plants and animals that are present
There is also feedback from the various different sensors in the environment) enhances the psychological health
within the body, including central receptors, e.g. barore- _ benefits [41].
ceptors, chemoreceptors, and those within the muscles, It appears that having access to green spaces may fa-
e.g. metaboreceptors and mechanoreceptors. These pro- _ cilitate physical activity and thus drive behaviour change
vide physiological and biomechanical information. Input by decreasing perception of effort and increasing moti-
also arises from auditory and visual information. In vation. An increase in physical activity levels will have a
addition, there will also be the input of cognitive factors direct impact on health parameters. However, would
like prior experience at a given effort and context of the green exercise offer greater benefits in terms of other
exercise, e.g. is it training or competition? All of these markers of health than urban or indoor exercise?
are integrated pre-consciously and will determine what a
participant perceives the effort of exercise to be. Green exercise and health

In the case of green exercise, the inputs from the vi- A systematic review of studies comparing indoor versus
sual system, the feed-forward centre as well as cognitive outdoor activity conducted in natural environment sug-
input may be able to act as a distractive stimulus, redu- gests that outdoor activity which is conducted in a na-
cing the perception of exertion. Indeed this has been tural or green environment causes greater feelings of
suggested for other distractive stimuli e.g. music [30]. It revitalisation and positive engagement [9]. All types of
is likely that promoting attention to an external pleasant green exercise activities also improve self-esteem and
and green environment reduces awareness of physiologic negative mood subscales, such as tension, anger and de-
sensations and negative emotions, thus minimizing the _ pression [42,43]. Interestingly, the first five minutes of
perception of effort. As discussed, mood is enhanced green exercise appears to have the biggest impact on
and perception of effort appears to be reduced with mood and self-esteem, suggesting an immediate psycho-
greenness [28]. Further evidence is shown, with real and _ logical health benefit [16]. Participating in green exercise
simulated nature, in comparison to other environments activities also affects physiological parameters which differ
(built or indoor) the increasing cognitive components to the changes observed in matched activity in an urban en-
including mood [9,10,12,16,31]. This suggests that green _ vironment [13]. There are, however, only a handful of stu-
exercise reduces perceived effort and allows individuals dies that have been conducted to investigate physiological

Gladwell et al. Extreme Physiology & Medicine 2013, 2:3 Page 4 of 7
http://www.extremephysiolmed.com/content/2/1/3
health markers [13,14,18,44,45]. Physiological outcomes in adrenaline is the improved immune function in the
have included heart rate, blood pressure and autonomic form of increased natural killer cell activity. Natural
control (using heart rate variability) and endocrine markers _ killer cell activity increased for up to 30 days after a
including noradrenaline, adrenaline and cortisol (an object- _ three-day trip to a forest for males but only seven days
ive measure of stress). for females [52]. This suggests that the interaction with
Post-exercise blood pressure returns to baseline values _ nature does not have to be extreme to gain wide-ranging
more quickly after exercising in front of rural scenes _ physiological health benefits.
compared to urban settings [12]. Japanese studies moni-
toring the physiological effect of walking within real forest | Connectedness to nature
environments (Shinrin-Yoku or forest bathing) reported _ Parental physical activity behaviours influence not only
similar findings. Significantly lower systolic and diastolic children’s physical activity patterns but also their atti-
blood pressure occurred following both viewing alone _ tudes to physical activity and choice of exercise environ-
and walking in the forest environment when compared ment. If children engage less with nature, when they
to the same activity in an urban environment distinctly | become parents their offspring may also be less likely to
lacking in any vegetation or plantation [13,46,47]. A re- seek out nature. A cycle of unfamiliarity and disconnect-
duction in sympathetic activation assessed by lowered edness is then likely to be passed from generation to
urinary noradrenaline may have elicited these effects on generation. The human costs of this separation include
blood pressure [46]. Early work by Ulrich [48] suggested attention difficulties and behavioural problems, higher
exposure to nature-heightened arousal and attention rates of emotional and physical illness and diminished
capacity with observed increases in heart rate. However, __ use of the senses [53,54].
viewing scenes of nature following exposure to a stress- Despite evidence suggesting that natural environments
ful video [49] later confirmed that increases in parasym- facilitate physical activity and provide health benefits
pathetic activity occur more synonymous with lowered — [10], relatedness and/or connectedness to nature is de-
heart rate. In addition, heart rate variability (HRV), an clining in particular areas and parts of the world, espe-
indicator of autonomic function, increased following cially in children and adolescents. This is primarily due
both viewing and walking in a forest environment [50]. to a lack of contact with nature, termed ‘the extinction
High HRV suggests healthy autonomic nervous system of experience’ [55] or ‘nature deficit disorder’ [53]. The
function and is inversely correlated with cardiovascular current generation of youth is largely restricted from
disease risk. HRV gives an indication of the adaptability accessing nature due to parental fears regarding stran-
of the nervous system in responding to challenges — gers, traffic and criminal activity [56-58]. Only 10% of
experienced by an individual such as stress and exer- _ today’s generation of youth has regular access to nature,
cise. Using HRV analysis, a study from Japan [47] compared to the 40% of adults who did so when they
showed a tendency for a higher HRV, reflective of para- | were young [59]. Adolescents living in urbanised areas
sympathetic activity, whilst participants sat outside often perceive the countryside to be intimidating and are
within a forest environment. This effect has been reluctant to visit if they have not experienced it as chil-
repeated indoors in a controlled environment enabling dren. The amount of time spent outdoors does appear
viewing nature alone to be highlighted as a cause for _ to be a positive correlate of physical activity in both chil-
increased parasympathetic activity [14] and decreased dren and adolescents [60-62]. Although small amounts
heart rate [45]. of time are spent in green space in children, those who
Increasing the level of psychological stress is detrimen- do tend to undertake higher intensity activity [63]. How-
tal to health, and with stress reportedly increasing [51], ever, if generations become disengaged with nature and
methods to help to cope with stress are required. Nature __ less importance is placed on the environment as a useful
may be one such solution as it does also appear to re- _ resource for health, the distance to travel to get to the
duce stress markers. Endocrine markers adrenaline, nor- _ green spaces will increase.
adrenaline and the stress hormone cortisol, all fall after
being within nature, suggesting that exposure to nature Discussion
affects the two main stress systems, the sympatho- The purpose of this review was to identify and discuss
adrenal medullary and the hypothalamus-pituitary- how the great outdoors can benefit the general popula-
adrenal axis [13,52]. These studies suggest that exposure _ tion. With declining physical activity levels in the devel-
to forest environments is relaxing and has stress- oped world, initiatives to curb this downward trend are
reducing properties as observed by reductions in the increasingly important. The great outdoors has been a
physiological parameters of blood pressure, heart rate crucial part of human evolution, and it is likely that this
(accompanied by an increase in HRV) and endocrine reaches into modern beliefs and attitudes towards na-
markers. A further effect associated with the reduction ture, both conscious and unconscious [5]. There is

Gladwell et al. Extreme Physiology & Medicine 2013, 2:3 Page 5 of 7
http://www.extremephysiolmed.com/content/2/1/3
evidence to suggest that participating in physical activity nature. Although seemingly counterintuitive for the pur-
in a natural environment, or green exercise, might en- _ pose of research concerning the great outdoors, the use of
gage people in physical activity by increasing enjoyment controlled indoor environments is important for explo-
of participation, offering social interaction and increased ring the alteration of physiological parameters already
frequency of activity [19]. Interestingly, participating in observed. This will have important implications for using
green exercise activities alters the perception of effort. outdoor exercise for rehabilitation or prevention of dis-
For those people engaging in green exercise, the nature _ ease, especially cardiovascular disease.
element may help achieve a greater intensity of exercise There are however, disadvantages and barriers to using
without perception of effort changing. If a person per- the great outdoors. How the outdoor space is perceived
ceives exercise to be easier, it has the potential to be influences usage. Although individual preferences differ,
more enjoyable. By reducing the perceived effort expe- safety and opportunity for socialization are shown to be
rienced during green exercise, a greater intensity may be _ the key determinants for use of green spaces [64]. Ease of
achieved during the exercise whilst also maintaining ad- _access, including transportation to the place of interest,
herence to and motivation for the activity. Taken all to- suitable links between areas (i.e. footpaths not continuing
gether, this should help to improve physical activity without crossing/walking down busy roads/private land)
behaviour. Future studies need to explore the impact of all affect participation. Furthermore, socioeconomic status
the environment on perception of effort in greater also alters local green space usage for physical activity.
depth, incorporating input from other senses. Further- | Higher socioeconomic status enhances park safety, main-
more, it needs to examine to what intensity of exercise tenance, attractiveness and opportunity for socialization
nature may act as a distracter to perception of effort. and is an important determinant of access to more remote
It has been the purpose of previous reviews to assess _ nature (i.e. due to transport required to reach destination).
the role of nature from a health and well-being perspec- Concerns for personal safety will motivate people to avoid
tive. There is evidence linking the presence of surround- perceived dangerous situations, and going outdoors in
ing green spaces to better physical and mental health. some areas does pose a threat. This is influencing parental
This evidence suggests that better health is impacted by _ choices, and there is a growing disconnection with out-
the quality of green space, in particular, by levels of bio- door activity and more specifically nature in the new ge-
diversity. Further research should investigate the import- _neration of children. Also, neighbourhood crime safety,
ance of biodiversity on health for the careful management aesthetics, and traffic safety all influence participation
of these areas to ensure the maximum benefit for health _ levels. Safety concerns are also accentuated if the area is
and for the environment. Considering both the quality of, | remote, where injuries or exposure to the outdoors for a
and access to, green space, evidence for the impact on _ prolonged period of time, especially in extremes of wea-
physical activity is conflicting. Many studies have not — ther may occur. This is predominantly an issue for those
explored the use of more distant outdoor spaces for recre- _ individuals who are unprepared, not trained or not super-
ational use. The majority of studies use self-reported vised correctly.
details of physical activity type, duration and intensity,
which is subject to bias. Future studies should therefore Conclusions
use objective methods for assessing both physical activity To summarise, outdoor natural environments may pro-
and exercise environment. Accelerometry and Global vide some of the best all-round health benefits by in-
Positioning System monitoring including Smartphones creasing physical activity levels with lower levels of
should enable this [63]. perceived exertion, altering physiological functioning in-
Engaging in physical activity outdoors provides oppor- _ cluding stress reduction, restoring mental fatigue, and
tunities linked to better health which is unavailable from improving mood and self-esteem and perceived health.
indoor activity, such as exposure to sunlight for suffi- Thus, exercise within green spaces and the great out-
cient vitamin D levels. Additionally, outdoor activity doors may be a useful natural medicine (vis medicatrix
shows greater improvements in mental health compared —_naturae) [65] to address health challenges facing devel-
to indoor activity [9]. Building on the health benefits of | oped countries. Alongside the social aspect which some
outdoor activity, including exposure to nature during individuals crave, it may also increase enjoyment and ad-
outdoor activity, has a synergistic impact on markers of — herence to bring about positive behaviour changes in a
mental well-being and physiological markers [10]. The _ large proportion of the population.
study to date has identified changes in cardiovascular, The great outdoors, therefore, should not be just con-
endocrine and autonomic function which suggests a psy- _ sidered a playground for those who seek the thrills of ex-
chophysiological impact of nature and green exercise. treme sports, but emphasis should be placed on access
However, little has been done to identify the mechanisms _for all. One way of doing this is to ensure urban parks
by which these changes are influenced by experiencing are maintained and are developed to produce interesting

Gladwell et al. Extreme Physiology & Medicine 2013, 2:3 Page 6 of 7

http://www.extremephysiolmed.com/content/2/1/3

areas of high biodiversity, as well as more open play — 12. Pretty J, Peacock J, Sellens M, Griffin M: The mental and physical health

areas, where more sports may be played, increasing op- outcomes of green exercise. Int J Environ Heal Res 2005, 15(5):319-337.

ah ce 13. Park B, Tsunetsugu Y, Kasetani T, Kagawa T, Miyazaki Y: The physiological
portunities for exercise. Not only may both types of area effects of Shinrin-yoku (taking in the forest atmosphere or forest

elicit greater health benefits, but also may offer protec- bathing): evidence from field experiments in 24 forests across Japan.

tion for the natural environment and preserve species. Environ Health Prev Med 2010, 15(1):18-26.

. 14. Gladwell VF, Brown DK, Barton JL, Tarvainen MP, Kuoppa P, Pretty J,

The management of countryside, forests and more ex- Suddaby JM, Sandercock GR: The effects of views of nature on autonomic

treme environments also needs careful consideration in- control. Eur J App! Physiol 2012, 11:1-8.

cluding ensuring access for all, but without the pressure 15. Ward Thompson C, Roe J, Aspinall P, Mitchell R, Clow A, Miller D: More

ro A green space is linked to less stress in deprived communities: evidence
of too many people visiting these areas, as this would from salivary cortisol patterns. Landscape Urban Plan 2012, 105(3):221-229.
potentially destroy the natural environment that elicits 16. Barton J, Pretty J: What is the best dose of nature and green exercise for

these health benefits. The challenge for researchers in improving mental health? A multi-study analysis. Environ Sci Technol 2010,

3 . arse 44(10):3947-3955.

this field is not only determining whether knowledge of 17. Barton J, Griffin M, Pretty J: Exercise, nature and socially interactive based

nature’s health benefits can act as a motivator for behav- initiatives improve mood and self-esteem in the clinical population.

iour change, but also ensuring that the increased use of Perspect Public Health 2012, 132(2):89-96.

‘natareas a therapy’ ts accompanied by weonservationit 18. Li Q, Otsuka T, Kobayashi M, Wakayama Y, Inagaki H, Katsumata M, Hirata Y,

F . Li Y, Hirata K, Shimizu T, Suzuki H, Kawada T, Kagawa T: Acute effects of
approach to ensure preservation of the environment. It walking in forest environments on cardiovascular and metabolic

is hoped that by more individuals partaking in green ex- parameters. Eur J App! Physio! 2011, 111(11):2845-2853.

ercise and enjoying the great outdoors, they will #etain 19. Hug SM, Hartig T, Hansmann R, Seeland K, Hornung R. Restorative qualities
. . . . of indoor and outdoor exercise settings as predictors of exercise

their evolutionary connection with nature and act to be- frequency. Health Place 2009, 15(4):971-980.

come more protective of it. 20. Hallal PC, Andersen LR, Bull FC, Guthold R, Haskell W, Ekelund U: Global

physical activity levels: surveillance progress, pitfalls, and prospects.

Abbreviation’ Lancet 2012, 380(9838):247-257.

HRV: Heart rate variability 21. United Nations: Population Division. Edited by DESA. New York: Population

Division, United Nations; 2005.
oo. 22. O'Keefe JH, Vogel R, Lavie CJ, Cordain L: Achieving hunter-gatherer fitness in

Competing interests the 21st century: back to the future. Am J Med 2010, 123(12):1082-1086

The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 23. Harvey SB, Hotopf M, Overland S, Mykletun A: Physical activity and

common mental disorders. Br J Psychiatry 2010, 197(5):357-364.

Authors’ contributions 24. Ryan RM, Deci EL: Self-determination theory and the facilitation of

All authors helped plan, develop and write the manuscript. All authors read intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. Am Psychol

and approved the final manuscript. 2000, 55:68-78.

25. Schasberger M, Hussa CS, Polgar MF, McMonagle JA, Burke SJ, Gegaris AJ Jr:

Received: 29 July 2012 Accepted: 2 November 2012 Promoting and developing a trail network across suburban, rural, and

Published: 3 January 2013 urban communities. Am J Prev Med 2009, 37(6):S336-S344.

26. Focht BC: Brief walks in outdoor and laboratory environments: effects on

References affective responses, enjoyment, and intentions to walk for exercise. Res

1. Hartig T, Cooper Marcus C: Healing gardens - places for nature in health Q Exercise Sport 2009, 80(3):61 1-620.
care. Lancet 2006, 368:536-S37. 27. Ceci R, Hassmen P: Self-monitored exercise at three different RPE

2. Horowitz S: Therapeutic gardens and horticultural therapy: growing roles intensities in treadmill vs field running. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1991,
in health care. Altern Comp Ther 2012, 18(2):78-83. 23(6):732-738

3. Maas J, Verheij RA, Groenewegen PP, de Vries S, Spreeuwenberg S: Green 28. Akers A, Barton J, Cossey R, Gainsford P, Griffin M, Micklewright D: Visual
space, urbanity, and health: how strong is the relation? J Epidemiol color perception in green exercise: positive effects on mood and
Community Health 2006, 60(7):587-592 perceived exertion. Environ Sci Technol 2012, 46(16):8661-8666.

4, Maas J, Verheij RA, de Vries S, Spreeuwenberg P, Schellevis FG, 29. Hampson DB, St Clair Gibson A, Lambert MI, Noakes TD: The influence of
Groenewegen PP: Morbidity is related to a green living environment. sensory cues on the perception of exertion during exercise and central
J Epidemiol Community Health 2009, doi:10.1136/jech.2008.079038. regulation of exercise performance. Sports Med 2001, 31(13):935-952.

5. Wilson EO: Biophilia: The Human Bond with other Species. Cambridge, 30. Boutcher SH, Trenske M: The effects of sensory deprivation and music on
Masschusetts: Harvard University Press; 1984. perceived exertion and affect during exercise. J Sport Exercise Psy 1990,

6. Herzog T, Maguire C, Nebel M: Assessing the restorative components of 12:167-176.
environments. J Environ Psychol 2003, 23(2):159-170. 31. Peacock J, Hine R, Pretty J: The Mental Health Benefits of Green Exercise

7. Kaplan R, Kaplan S: The Experience of Nature: A Psychological Perspective Activities and Green Care, February: Mind Week Report; 2007
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1989. 32. Ellaway A, Macintyre S, Bonnefoy X: Graffiti, greenery and obesity in

8. Townsend N, Bhatnagar P, Wickramasinghe K, Scarborough P, Foster C, Rayner adults: secondary analysis of European cross-sectional survey. Brit Med J
M: Physical Activity Statistics 2012. London: British Heart Foundation; 2012. 2005, doi:10.1136/bmj.38575.664549.F7.

9. Thompson Coon J, Boddy K, Stein K, Whear R, Barton J, Depledge MH: Does 33. Hillsdon M, Panter J, Foster C, Jones A: The relationship between access
participating in physical activity in outdoor natural environments have a and quality of urban green space with population physical activity.
greater effect on physical and mental wellbeing than physical activity Public Health 2006, 120(12):1127-1132.
indoors? A systematic review. Environ Sci Technol 2011, 45(5):1761-1772. 34. Maas J, Verheij RA, Spreeuwenberg P, Groenewegen PP: Physical activity as

10. Bowler DE, Buyung-Ali LM, Knight TM, Pullin AS: A systematic review of a possible mechanism behind the relationship between green space
evidence for the added benefits to health of exposure to natural and health: a multilevel analysis. BMC Pub Health 2008, 8:206-219.
environments. BMC Publ Health 2010, 10:456. 35. Takano T, Nakamura K, Watanabe M: Urban residential environments and

11. Pretty J, Griffin M, Sellens M, Pretty C: Green Exercise: Complementary Roles of senior citizens’ longevity in megacity areas: the importance of walkable
Nature, Exercise and Diet in Physical and Emotional Well-Being and green spaces. J Epidemiol Commun H 2002, 56:913-918.

Implications for Public Health Policy. Colchester: University of Essex; CES. 36. Grahn P, Stigsdotter UA: Landscape planning and stress. Urban Forest
Occasional Paper 2003-1 Urban Green 2003, 2:1-18.

Gladwell et al. Extreme Physiology & Medicine 2013, 2:3 Page 7 of 7
http://www.extremephysiolmed.com/content/2/1/3
37. De Vries S, Verheij RA, Groenewegen PP, Spreeuwenberg P: Natural 63. Wheeler BW, Cooper AR, Page AS, Jago R: Greenspace and children's
environments - healthy environments? An exploratory analysis of the physical activity: a GPS/GIS analysis of the PEACH project. Prev Med 2010,
relationship between greenspace and health. Environment Plann A 2003, 51(2):148-152.
35(10):1717-1731 64. Leslie E, Cerin E, Kremer P: Perceived neighborhood environment and
38. Maas J, van Dillen SM, Verheij RA, Groenewegen PP: Social contacts as a park use as mediators of the effect of area socio-economic status on
possible mechanism behind the relation betwen green space and walking behaviors. J Phys Act Heal 2010, 7:802-810,
health. Health Place 2009, 15:586-595. 65. Logan AC, Selhub EM: Vis Medicatrix naturae: does nature ‘minister to the
39. Mitchell R, Popham F: Greenspace, urbanity and health: relationships in mind’? Biopsychosoc Med 2012, 6(1):11.
England. J Epidemiol Community Health 2007, 61:681-683.
40. Sugiyama T, E Leslie E, Giles-Corti B, Owen N: Associations of doi:10.1186/2046-7648-2-3
neighbourhood greenness with physical and mental health: do walking, Cite this article as: Gladwell et al: The great outdoors: how a green
social coherence and local social interaction explain the relationships? / exercise environment can benefit all. Extreme Physiology & Medicine 2013 23.
Epidemiol Community Health 2008, 62(5):e9.
41. Fuller RA, Irvine KN, Devine-Wright P, Warren PH, Gaston KJ: Psychological
benefits of greenspace increase with biodiversity. Bio! Lett 2007, 3:390-394.
42. Barton J, Hine R, Pretty J: The health benefits of walking in greenspaces
of high natural and heritage value. J Integr Environ Sci 2009, 6(4):261-278.
43. Pretty J, Peacock J, Hine R, Sellens M, South M, Griffin M: Green exercise in the
UK countryside: effects on health and psychological well-being and
implications for policy and planning. J Environ Plan Manag 2007, 50(2):211-231.
44, Ulrich RS: Natural versus urban scenes some psychophysiological effects.
Environment and Behaviour 1981, 13(5):523-556.
45. Laumann K, Garling T, Stormark K: Selective attention and heart rate
responses to natural and urban environments. J Environ Psycho! 2003,
23:125-134.
46. Li Q, Otsuka T, Kobayashi M, Wakayama Y, Inagaki H, Katsumata M, Hirata Y,
Li Y, Hirata K, Shimizu T, Suzuki H, Kawada T, Kagawa T: Acute effects of
walking in forest environments on cardiovascular and metabolic
parameters. Eur J App! Physiol 2011, doi:10.1007/s00421-011-1918-z.
47. Park B, Tsunetsugu Y, Kasetani T, Hirano H, Kagawa T, Sato M, Miyazaki Y:
Physiological effects of Shinrin-yoku (taking in the atmosphere of the
forest)—using salivary cortisol and cerebral activity as indicators. J
Physiol Anthropol 2007, 26(2):123-128.
48. Ulrich RS: Natural versus urban scenes: some psychophysiological effects.
Journal of Environment and Behaviour 1981, 13(5):523-556.
49. Ulrich RS, Simons RF, Losito BD, Fiorito E, Miles MA, Zelson M: Stress
recovery during exposure to natural and urban environments. J Environ
Psychol 1991, 11(3):201-230,
50. Park B, Tsunetsugu Y, Kasetani T, Morikawa T, Kagawa T, Miyazaki Y:
Physiological effects of forest recreation in a young conifer forest in
Hinokage Town, Japan. Silva Fennica 2009, 43(2):291-301
51. Chandola T, Britton A, Brunner E, Hemingway H, Malik M, Kumari M, Badrick
E, Kivimaki M, Marmot M: Work stress and coronary heart disease: what
are the mechanisms? Eur Hear J 2008, 29:640-648.
52. Li Q: Effect of forest bathing trips on human immune function.
Environmental Health and Preventive Medicine 2010, 15:9-17.
53. Louv R: Last Child in the Woods: Saving our Children from Nature-Deficit
Disorder. North Carolina: Algonquin; 2005.
54. RSPB: Every Child Outdoors: Children Need Nature. Nature Needs Children.
Bedfordshire: RSPB; 2010.
55. Pyle RM: Nature matrix: reconnecting people and nature. Oryx 2003,
37(02):206-214.
56. Orr D: Political economy and the ecology of childhood. In Children and
Nature: Psychological, Sociocultural and Evolutionary Investigations. Edited by
Kahn P, Kellert S. Massachusetts: The MIT Press; 2000:279-303.
57. White R: Young Children’s Relationship with Nature: It’s Importance to
Children’s Development and the Earth’s Future. Kansas: White Hutchinson
Leisure and Learning Group; 2004. Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
58. Ward Thompson C, Aspinall P, Montarzino A: The childhood factor: adult and take full advantage of:
visits to green places and the significance of childhood experience.
Environ Behav 2008, 40(1):111-143. s@inveniestoniiiesibalisian
59. England N: Childhood and Nature: A Survey on Changing Relationships with
Nature Across Generations, Cambridgeshire: Natural England; 2009. ¢ Thorough peer review
60. Sallis JF, Prochaska JJ, Taylor WC: A review of correlates of physical activity * No space constraints or color figure charges
of children and adolescents. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2000, 32(5):963-975. immediate: publiextionon acceptance
61. Gordon-Larsen P, McMurray RG, Popkin BM: Determinants of adolescent
physical activity and inactivity patterns. Pediatrics 2000, 105(6):e83-€90. ¢ Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
62. Cleland V, Crawford D, Baur LA, Hume C, Timperio A, Salmon J: A prospective Research which is freely available for redistribution
examination of children’s time spent outdoors, objectively measured
physical activity and overweight. Int J Obes 2008, 32(11):1685-1693. oe ‘pt at
www. biomedcentral.com/submit ()) Biomed central

