 Hi everyone, and welcome back to class. This video we will talk about habits including how to form them and why we should make an effort to make a habit out of our healthy lifestyles. Start by thinking about what habits you may have accrued as a part of your daily life. Maybe you're considering your morning routine like brushing your teeth or showering. These habits take little effort and we do them so much that we don't even think of them as habits. Now think about a different type of habit that may take more effort. This could include your study habits for example. Maybe you're studying best by making flashcards, studying with friends, or studying in a certain location. These are all habits that take effort but ensure that you can prepare for your exams to the best of your ability. This week we're going to discuss how to create exercise and diet habits that will make eating healthy and getting physical activity part of your daily routine. On average it takes about two months to develop a habit. So these lifestyle changes may take some time and effort to fully develop. It's not so much that you're going to be super fit or even the most super nutritious at the end of two months. The major change that occurs in these two months is in your brain. You have become better at exercising and or choosing nutritious foods as a result of rewiring your brain. Behavior change is hard and it takes time. However once you get started you will be surprised how quickly you can fall into a new routine. Before you watch the lectures for this week think of some ways you can incorporate healthy eating and exercise into your daily routine. Be sure to watch the videos this week to learn how to sustain these routines.
 When you lift weights, physical changes happen to your body. Your body becomes toned up. You have more energy, even with less sleep. And you are far less stressed out. And you can even experience personal changes as you start to feel more confident in your body. But the average American doesn't really love strength training. Well, half of the American population does complete the recommended aerobic workout each week. Only 20% of Americans do recommended strength training that work major muscle groups to train and tone your body. So welcome back, everyone. I'm Dr. Carmen Suane, your instructor. And today we're going to dive into what the science has to show regarding the true power of strength training. The power of strength training. So few are doing it, yet the scientific benefits are stacked in its favor, from bone protection to disease prevention. And it appears to have special benefits for women. There are so many misconceptions about strength and resistance training. Women, not so long ago, women didn't think they had a place in strength and resistance training. It was thought that you'll become muscle bound and so bulky that your body would become rigid. But that myth has been debunked. And we see this in athletes who can hit the ball further, jump higher and run faster as a result of strength training. And gradually, very gradually, we started realizing that there are benefits with strength training beyond sports and women in particular, happen to be neglecting strength training at their own peril. Strength training is the only kind of exercise that makes muscles bigger. Bigger muscle is stronger muscle, which allows us to generate more force and move faster. We lose muscle as we age. Young people tend to take this for granted. The day to day parts of life that require strength, like walking upstairs and carrying a heavy bag of groceries. But a sedentary lifestyle means that people are gradually becoming weaker over time. A process that will start in your mid 20s, if you're not doing any strengthening exercise. And it will continue gradually until up about your fifth decade in life. And then you start to see a much faster decline. This decline in skeletal muscle is accompanied by an increase in body fat and termed sarcopenic obesity. Even if the diameter of the arm or the leg may stay the same with age, we can see by looking under the skin at a cross sectional area, as shown in the diagram here. And it's not hard to understand how this physiological process results in weakened and ultimately frailty. But we also know that building strength training and building muscle through resistance training can fight back against this process of sarcopenic obesity. And it's also one of the very few ways to make bones denser. A perk that is especially important to women. As a college student, you have likely already achieved your peak bone mass. And from here on out, you will likely lose more than you make. However, lifting something heavy, like a dumbbell, makes bones bear more weight. And in exercise, stressing your bones is a good thing. Our bones are constantly remodeling. Your body is constantly adding more calcium to bones and taking calcium away from your bones. This delicate balance starts to tip as people age and they lose more mineral from their bone than they're able to lay down. Over time, bone becomes less dense and more brittle and prone to osteoporosis. A condition that affects about 10 million Americans, 80% of which are female. Women have smaller, thinner bones than men from the start. And after menopause, they lose estrogen, a hormone that protects bones. But is there something that we can do about that? Progressive resistance training by non-athletic populations, including the elderly, is a relatively new practice. Historically, weightlifting or strength training has been limited to the young, athletic individuals seeking to improve performance as a component of a sports training program. As a result, strength training research has concentrated on this population. However, the benefits gained from resistance training, specifically improved muscle strength, agility and resilience, extend beyond the playing fields to the performance of daily activities. Over the past two decades, numerous studies have focused on bone and resistance training. In older populations, the effects of resistance training may make a difference in being able to climb stairs, carry groceries or rise from a chair. In addition, resistance training may have a significant impact in maintaining bone health. Recently, progressive resistance training principles have been applied to a large and growing population of older men and women for whom the relationship of muscle strength and balance is critical in maintaining functional independence and resisting falls and for decreasing factors associated with osteoporosis. Several studies have shown that resistance training can greatly increase physical strength in elderly people and may have a positive effect on bone. Wolf's Law states that stress or mechanical loading applied to the bone via muscle and tendons has a direct effect on bone formation and remodeling. In support of this, numerous studies have shown that male weightlifters have greater bone mineral density than non-athletes. The research completed to date indicates that resistance training is positively associated with high bone mineral density in both young and older adults and that the effect of resistive exercise is relatively site-specific to the working muscles and to the bones to which they attach. Although aerobic exercise and weight-bearing physical activity are important in maintaining overall health and healthy bone, resistance training exercise seems to have a more potent impact on bone density. The positive effect on bone has recently been demonstrated by a randomized controlled trials using high intensity resistance training protocols. It has been suggested that high intensity resistance training may help to achieve the highest possible peak bone mass in premenopausal women and may aid in maintaining or increasing bone in postmenopausal women. However, the question still remains, what type of resistance training is best? A research study by Maldonzo and Snow in 2000 examined this question in relation to elderly men and women. 24 elderly men and 18 elderly women participated in a 24-week study. The average age of the men was 54 years. The women were all postmenopausal and not on estrogen therapy. Their mean age was about 52 years. None of the participants had participated in an exercise or resistance training program for two years preceding the study. Baseline measurements were taken for bone mass, body composition, and insulin-like growth factor, IGF-1. This is a bone deposition favoring hormone. And also, one repetition maximum measures were taken. That is the maximum weight a participant could lift one time Then, participants were randomly assigned to either a high intensity or a moderate intensity resistance training program. The moderate intensity resistance training program was a seated, machine-based program. The participants in this group trained three times per week for about 75 minutes per supervised session. This group performed 13 exercises each session on weight machines. The exercises included things like leg extension, leg press, hamstring curls, arm curls, tricep press, chest press, et cetera. Exercise intensities ranged from 40 to 60% of a person's 1RM for three sets of 10 to 13 repetitions. This resistance training program resulted in significant increases in bone mineral density of the greater trochanter for both males and females. Moderate intensity resistance training also significantly increased lean mass, 3.4% for women and 1.9% for males. Peak force was improved and strength for the men as well as the women. However, there was no significant change in IGF-1 for either group. The lack of increase in IGF-1 indicates that the increases in bone mineral density was most likely a result of physical stress on the bone and not a hormonal effect. The high intensity resistance training groups also trained three times per week for about 75 minutes per supervised session. However, these participants used free weights in a functional standing program. This program involved 12 exercises, which included things like free weight back squat, deadlift, bicep curls, sit-ups, tricep extensions, chest press, incline chest press, shoulder press, et cetera. The exercise intensity was set as 70% of all men and the exercise intensity was set as 70% of one repetition maximum. Participants performed three sets of eight repetitions. One key difference of this resistance program was that it was periodized. There were two 12-week sessions separated by one transitional, that was non-resistance activities, to allow recovery from the high exercise intensity and to prevent injuries. The high intensity resistance exercise resulted in significant increases in bone mineral density of the greater trochanter for both males and females. However, only males achieved the added result of significant increase in lumbar spine mineral density. High intensity resistance training resulted in significant increases in lean mass, 8% for females and 3.2% for males. Also, there was seen increases in strength and peak force for both males and females. Again, there were no significant changes in IGF-1 for either gender, which re-emphasizes the probability that physical stress is responsible for increases in bone mass. The results of this study demonstrate that both males and females benefit from resistance exercise three times per week of both moderate and high intensities. None of the participants were injured during this study, indicating that intensities as high as 70% of a one repetition max are safe for most healthy elderly persons. High intensity resistance exercise favored bone formation slightly better than moderate intensity resistance exercise, especially for elderly men. If it is not safe to have an individual elderly client perform the high intensity exercise, then moderate to low intensity may be more appropriate. Even consider the possibility of combining intensities. Each resistance training program must be tailored for the specific individual, and each provides important benefits. The added benefits of increased lean mass and muscle strength are especially important for elderly clients as they may help prevent fall and injuries and preserve independence. Strength training also comes with the less visible benefit of lowering risk for multiple diseases. The only real way we can increase our metabolism, unless we take drugs, is to lift weights and to maintain or increase our lean mass. In doing so, this makes the body more sensitive to insulin and therefore more durable against certain diseases. Recent research suggests that lifting decreases women's risk of cardiovascular disease and type two diabetes. In a 2016 study from the Harvard Medical School and the National Institute of Health, data from over 36,000 older women between the ages of 47 and 98 years were asked to fill out questionnaires about an entire decade detailing their health and exercise levels. One of these specific questions asked women how much strength training they had done in the past year. The researchers then tracked which of the women had a heart attack or type two diabetes. It turns out whether or not a woman did strength training indicated a lot about her health. Compared to women who avoided strength training, those who did any amount of strength training were likely to have a lower body mass index and a healthier diet and also less likely to be a current smoker. Type two diabetes risk was 30% lower and cardiovascular disease risk was 17% lower. Even when controlling for variables such as age, vegetable and fruit intake and physical activity. But adding in aerobic training drove risks down even more. Those who did 120 minutes of aerobic exercise per week and some strength training lowered type two diabetes risk by 65%. Like the guidelines suggest, most people should do both aerobic and resistance exercise for the biggest gains. The number one reason old people end up leaving their homes and going to assisted living, they cannot stand up out of a chair, which makes sense. There's well documented evidence that muscle strength decreases with advancing age. Muscle strength decreases approximately 12 to 15% per decade after the age of 50 years in both age and physical activity. This is a result of both males and females. In addition, muscle mass also decreases with increased age. In a cross-sectional study of healthy men of equal mass, muscle mass comprised 24% of total mass and those aged 20 to 29 years, but decreased to 13% and participants aged 70 to 79 years. Numerous studies have validated that the decline in strength in older adults is associated with this age-related loss of muscle mass. Sounds kind of depressing, except resistance exercise training has been shown to increase muscle mass and therefore muscle strength, even in the older population. In healthy older men and women, four months of resistance training resulted in a 16 to 23% increase in muscle mass. Multiple studies have also demonstrated these same changes and that they can occur even in the ninth decade of life. In a systematic review of 41 articles, resistance exercise training in older adults was associated with gains in strength. In a Cochrane review of 74 studies, found similar results. Both reviews use studies that examines both healthy older adults and frail adults. Feotrone and colleagues showed that nursing home residents were able to increase their strength on average of 97% after 10 weeks of resistance exercise training. Because nursing home residents represent the frailest segment of older adults, this study demonstrates that the intervention is beneficial for even those most severely affected by frailty. Motor performance in older adults has also been shown to improve after resistance training. In a systematic review, Latham and colleagues found that resistance exercise training in healthy and frail elders improve their gait speed and also increased the distance covered in a six minute walk test. In studies of frail elders living in the nursing home and in the community, Feotrone and colleagues and Chandler and colleagues showed that 10 weeks of resistance training resulted in improved gait speed. There may be a dose response relationship between resistance exercise and motor performance because Galvao and Taffy found that subjects who did more repetitions of resistance exercise had almost twice the improvement in their 400 meter walk time compared to those who did fewer repetitions. And this, my friends, is what translate into what older adults really care about, performing activities of daily living, living independently, and staying in their own home. The standard lifting protocol is typically eight to 12 repetitions and repeated three to four sets. This is the most common recommendation for the introductory training programs in healthy populations and recommended in order to achieve maximal strength gains. The main advocates of multiple set training programs propose that multiple sets are superior for achieving optimal physiological adaptation. But have you ever wondered, what if I do less? How much benefit will I get? Well, these researchers did, and the purpose of this next study was to determine the effects of increasing the volume of weight training from one set to three sets upon body composition and muscular strength. In this study, 16 male weight trainers were randomly assigned to one of two training groups. Supervised weight training targeting the upper body was conducted three times per week for eight weeks using either one set or three sets of six repetitions to fatigue. Participants were measured before and after the training intervention for strength performance and body fat. Results of the study revealed that both training groups improved significantly, 20.7% in terms of muscular strength, with no significant differences being observed between the one set and the three set groups. Significant decreases were observed in skinfold measures for the one set group. Conclusions from this study are that one set of high intensity resistance training was as effective as three sets for increasing the strength of muscle groups in the upper body, and that one set protocol also produced significantly greater decreases in adiposity. So you don't have much time? No worries, one set doesn't take long. In fact, the calculated time taken to complete a one set training program was significantly lower than that taken to complete three. This approximated to a 66% decrease in exercise time. This reduction in time investment might have positive effects on training program compliance, reduced injury rate, and fatigue. But what if you don't belong to a gym? Calisthenics is a term used to define a generic set of body weight exercises. But how effective are calisthenics at increasing strength? That particular question was the aim of this study discussed here, was to evaluate calisthenics effects on posture, strength, and body composition in untrained individuals. In this research study, 28 male participants were divided into two groups, a calisthenic based intervention group and a control group. The study lasted for eight weeks, and each participant underwent a body composition analysis, a postural assessment, hand grip test, a pushup, and a pull up test. Each participant was tested at baseline and then again at post intervention. Results from the study show that the calisthenics group improved their posture with their eyes open and with their eyes closed. They also improved their strength by improving the number of pushups they completed and also the number of pull ups. Body composition was also improved. And there was no difference shown for the hand grip test. There were no significant differences displayed for any variable for the control group. Conclusions from this study indicate that calisthenic training is a feasible and effective method to improve posture, strength, and body composition without the use of any major training equipment. Strength training. It doesn't matter if you're young or very, very old. You can increase your muscle strength. Resistance training is the only way to increase the size of your skeletal muscles. You can use weight machines, free weights, and your own body weight to get results. And it doesn't have to take very long because for many, one set carries the same strength because for many, one set carries the same benefits as multiple sets. It seems like a no brainer to me. And as Arnold says, resistance training in the gym and in life can only build a stronger character.
 Are you sitting there listening to this thinking you would like to exercise someday, maybe tomorrow, if only you had a little bit more time, the energy, the money to join a new life, someone to exercise with, cuter clothes, better legs, not so many aches and pains. Maybe this is you. Maybe this isn't you. But even if it's not you, you probably do know someone who says these types of things. Here's the bad news. Those are all excuses. And excuses are no excuse. They are little self-imposed boundaries or limitations that people hide behind. They're obstacles in our way. It's just our way of telling ourselves no. Here's the good news. Those were all excuses. And you can walk right by them on your way to better health and freedom from self-imposed ideas that degrade your quality of life. Let's learn more about it. I'm your instructor, Dr. Carmen Swain, who today is going to devote her time to talking the talk and walking the walk, to wellness that is. Let's find out what the science has to show about walking. Walking may seem more like a leisurely mode of transportation than formal exercise, but it absolutely counts. If you think about all of the fitness activities, like a pyramid, walking is the foundation. It's what we've done since the beginning of time. And we should not discount its benefits. A stroll offers a surprising number of health perks. In a recent study of people who spent much of their day sitting, those who took breaks by standing or walking, even for just short bouts, had trimmer wastes, lower body mass index scores, and better measures on heart disease and diabetes risk than those who did not take those breaks. We've previously learned that breaking up sedentary periods as frequently as you can is really important. And walking is usually the easiest way to do that. Even if it's just for a few minutes, it really makes a difference. Think of a medical condition. Go ahead, pick one. And guess what? Walking is probably good for preventing it. Walking can even pack the same powerful effects as much tougher types of exercise like running. One study examining walking versus running found that brisk walking can lower your risk for high blood pressure, high cholesterol, and diabetes just as much as running can. The results of this study showed that equivalent energy expenditures produce similar results in disease risk. So if you want to run to get the effect of reducing your risk, that's fine. But you can do the same thing by walking. It just takes a little bit more time. Walking can lower your risk for disease, even if that disease is cancer. In the most common cancer in the United States, breast cancer, research has found that exercise can seriously influence your risk of dying from this disease. In a study from the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, over 79,000 women, all of whom were runners or walkers, were followed for 11 years. None of these women had been diagnosed with breast cancer at the start of the study. And they all reported their distances for how far they ran or walked each week. Researchers found that women who met the current aerobic exercise guidelines, that's 2 and 1-1-2 hours of moderate activity or an hour and 15 minutes of vigorous activity a week, were 42% less likely to die of breast cancer during the study than those whose exercise fell short of the guidelines. This is even after adjusting for body mass index. So what's the secret? How does walking lower your risk of cancer? Only recently have we come to understand exercise reduces estrogen's effect on cancer by altering how the body breaks down the hormone into either harmful or benign byproducts. And also, while the current study controlled for BMI, another way exercise works in our favor is that it reduces women's levels of fatty tissue, which secretes estrogen and is the main source of the hormone in post-menopausal women. But you may be wondering, how does aerobic exercise affect estrogen levels in young women who are at high risk for breast cancer? The study shown here examines that question. Why is this study so important? Because for young women who are at high risk of breast cancer, often recommended practices are removing your ovaries or taking high risk reducing medications such as tamoxifen, which have been shown to reduce breast cancer risk. However, both are associated with short-term and long-term side effects. Aerobic exercise does not have negative long-term consequences. And it's an accessible activity for almost all people. So understanding if exercise can also lower estrogen levels is the first step in determining whether or not it can be used to reduce breast cancer in young women who are at high risk. And results of the study reveal that premenopausal women who are at high risk for breast cancer who participated in regular aerobic exercise for at least five months indeed have lower estrogen levels than women who do not exercise regularly. Can walking help you live a longer life? If your goal is longevity, walking may be the very best exercise. Walking is good for everyone, and especially beginners or novice exercisers. Those with orthopedic issues or those who are overweight, walking may ultimately be better than running or other strenuous forms of physical activity because it doesn't cause bodily wear and tear. Another reason that walking rules is that walking has the lowest quit rate of any type of exercise. And don't despair. Don't give up that walk just because you can't fit in the recommended 30 minutes of daily exercise. Growing evidence suggests that even half that much can help. This is no excuse to slack off. Regular exercise strengthens muscles, reduces the risks of diseases, and promotes mental well-being. The more exercise, the better. But not everyone has the time or the willpower. So researchers have set out to find the minimum amount of physical activity needed to reap health benefits. This study from Taiwan suggested that 15 minutes of moderate exercise a day can lead to a longer life. What I love about this research finding is that this could convince many individuals that they are able to incorporate physical activity into their busy lives. This study took place in Taiwan. And the researchers noted that East Asians, including China, Japan, and Taiwan, are generally less physically active than Western counterparts. And their workouts tend to be less intense. In this study, over 400,000 Taiwanese adults were asked, how much exercise did you do in the previous month? Based on their answers, they were put into five groups of varying activity levels, from inactive to highly active. Researchers kept track of their progress for eight years and, on average, calculated their projected life expectancy. The study found those who exercise just 15 minutes a day or 90 minutes a week cut the risk of mortality by 14% and extended their life expectancy by three years. Researchers also noted that each additional 15 minutes of exercise further reduced the risk of death. Sure, there's some limitations here. Answers were self-reported. The study, though very large, was observational, which means the health benefits could be not entirely due to exercise. But researchers did say they took into account factors that might affect health, such as smoking and drinking. And outside scientists agree. They say the findings found here are in line with other research studies. And that's very, very good news. For the sedentary or underfit, the key is this. Some exercise is better than none. While the physical benefits of walking are notable, the mental boost that can be gleaned from adding a walk to your daily routine may be more immediate. One Stanford University study found that walking increased creative output by an average of 60%. Researchers labeled this type of creativity divergent thinking. This is a thought process used to generate creative ideas by exploring many possible solutions. When one goes for a walk, you open up the opportunity for free flow of ideas. Walking is a simple and robust solution to increasing creativity and physical activity. In this study, psychologists also found that a 10-minute walk may be just as good as a 45-minute workout when it comes to reducing the symptoms of anxiety. All of this tends to make sense. We know previous science has shown that engaging in activities that allow our minds to wander, this promotes a mental state that's conducive to innovative ideas and aha moments. But it's not only your creativity that will benefit from this mental lift. The act of walking is also a proven mood booster. One study found that 12 minutes of walking resulted in an increase in joviality, vigor, attentiveness, and self-confidence versus the same time spent sitting. Walking in nature specifically was found to reduce ruminating over negative experiences, which increases activity in the brain associated with negative emotions and raises the risk of depression. Wow. So to wrap this up, if I go for a short walk, I can feel better about myself, have higher self-confidence, not think about bad things so much. Be more creative in my thoughts, have a better outlook on life, not be anxious, and overall just feel happier just from a 10-minute walk. I don't know about you, but it's pretty clear what I have in my plan for today. If you start a walking habit early in life, this ensures better mobility years down the line when you may need it. But even if you start in old age, it can keep you upright and on the go. One recent study found that older sedentary adults cut their risk of disability by a quarter by taking up light forms of exercise, including walking. Other research has showed that when a group of seniors took two walks a day, they became nearly 20% more mobile in their daily activities. It can also keep your aches away. In a study of older people with arthritis who walked 45 minutes a week, they were 80% more likely to maintain or even improve their physical functioning compared with those who didn't walk regularly. All of this science just builds upon previous scientific adage, that is Newton's first law of motion. A body in motion stays in motion. Have you ever heard the recommendation of getting 10,000 steps a day? Sometimes even if you buy a smartwatch like an Apple watch or a fitness tracker like a Fitbit, these devices may encourage you to take 10,000 steps a day. But do you really have to take that many steps to be healthy? Experts say that while 10,000 steps a day is a good number to reach, any amount of activity that is beyond what you're currently doing will likely benefit your health. The origins of 10,000 step recommendation isn't exactly scientific. The magic number 10,000 dates back to a marketing campaign conducted at about the time of the Tokyo Olympic Games. At that time, a Japanese company was introducing their new step counter called the Man-Poke. This translated into 10,000 steps meter. And they marketed their device with the slogan, let's walk 10,000 steps a day. Japanese walking clubs were fairly popular at that time. And the idea of a 10,000 step target seemed to have caught on because the slogan was catchy and people tended to like the nice round number. The rest, as they say, is history. Studies conducted since that time have suggested that people who increase their walking to 10,000 steps a day do experience health benefits. One study found that women who increase their step count to 10,000 steps a day reduce their blood pressure after 24 weeks of a walking program. Another study of overweight women found that walking 10,000 steps a day improved their glucose levels. Walking 10,000 steps a day is not an official recommendation from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Instead, this agency recommends adults engage in 150 minutes of moderate activity a week, such as brisk walking. To meet the CDC's recommendation, you need to walk about 7,000 to 8,000 steps a day. To put this into perspective, if you normally walk 5,000 steps a day, getting an extra 30 minute brisk walk in your day would take you to about 8,000 steps. The average U.S. adult walks about 5,900 steps a day. But there's no reason to stop there because we know that more is better. The Mayo Clinic recommends that people use step counters to set short-term goals, such as taking an extra 1,000 steps daily for one week. And then building up to a long-term goal, such as 10,000 steps per day. There's many ways to go about it, but the most important thing is to increase your activity beyond what you were doing before. Any amount of activity that you can do today that you didn't do yesterday is going to contribute to a happier and healthier you. So let's step to it. Thank you.
 Hello everyone, welcome to your weekly wrap-up. Let's continue our discussion of exercise and nutrition as a habit. Throughout this course, we have routinely emphasized the importance of habit formation on developing a healthy exercise and diet plan. This time, let's change things up a bit. We are going to present a situation and analyze how habit formation influences a more reliable behavior change in a college student, just like you. Hey, Julie, can you tell us about the student that we are going to follow in this case study? Brutus is a third-year student at Ohio State, taking food dysfunction and movement as medicine. He keeps himself fairly busy as he is taking 16 credit hours of classes this semester, volunteers regularly, and works multiple times a week as a receptionist at the University Hospital. Despite his busy schedule, Brutus has learned in class about the importance of exercise and nutrition in strengthening his body, relieving stress, and preventing chronic disease. He really wanted to improve these aspects of his life, but his busy student life has resulted in him living a sedentary lifestyle and ordering fast food from GrubHub because he doesn't have time to prepare his own meals. Last week, Brutus tried to take initiative and change his ways all at once. He went to the RPAC to work out four days in a row at different times each day and cooked his own dinner for three days as well. However, Brutus soon ran out of fresh food at his apartment and didn't have time during the week to go to the store. Additionally, he was really sore from exercising at the gym and lost his initiative to work out. This week, he's back to his old habits. What should Brutus do to improve his chances of regularly implementing a healthy diet and exercise routine? While Brutus failed to implement his behavior change in a sustainable manner, he was wise to recognize the fact that he needed to change his habits in order to improve his overall health. However, he tried to make long-term change too quickly, resulting in an unsustainable routine. When you create a habit or routine, the most important element is consistency, not intensity. Health does not change overnight. You have to make sustainable change in order to create a habit. For this reason, it may be best to begin by making a schedule. Brutus is a busy student, so he should map out a time each week to go to the store to buy the foods that he needs. Additionally, he should plan his workout schedule, including what time of day he will go to the gym, and what type of exercise he should target. These would be great first steps for Brutus. When making a plan, it is very important to ease into a new routine. For the first few weeks, it may be best for Brutus to work out only a few days per week and prepare his own meals two or three times more than normal. This will prevent these routines from becoming a burden immediately, which prevents burnout. Again, the goal is to make a habit that will last. If you ease into your new routine, you will have a more positive attitude than if you were forcing yourself to make a change constantly. It is best to break things up into multiple steps. For example, instead of developing a new routine for diet and exercise at the same time, Brutus would benefit from forming these habits separately. He should make a habit out of preparing his own meals regularly as a first step, and then form a habit of exercising subsequently. This will prevent Brutus from making himself too stressed out in his busy lifestyle by trying to create two behavior changes at once. Overall, these tips are important for Brutus to make a sustainable change. Remember that forming a habit is crucial to creating a healthy exercise and diet plan. Think about how you relate to Brutus in this example. Have you ever tried to make a change too fast and fallen short of your goal as a result? What advice do you have for Brutus to achieve his goals?
