 Hello everyone and welcome back to Food is Function, Movement is Medicine. This week we are going to dive into the concept of weight loss, including the physiology behind burning carbs and fats and discussing how effectively to lose weight. Thousands of people each year in the United States set a goal to lose weight. But as you might imagine, many individuals fail to construct an effective plan to do so. This is partially due to the amount of misleading information that people are told about weight loss. So today we are going to talk about some of the most common weight loss myths. What I often hear is that you must avoid fatty foods to lose weight. This is not exactly true. Fats are more caloric than carbohydrates, which means that they have the potential to accumulate and cause weight gain. But they are also still quite important for your body and supply nutrients as well. In fact, many diets rely on consuming fats for energy instead of eating other foods. So instead of taking fats out of your diet completely, you should try to focus on consuming healthy fats in your diet and decreasing unhealthy fats like trans fat and saturated fats. A good place to start is to reduce the amount of processed foods that we eat. These are often laden with unhealthy fats and processed carbohydrates. Instead focus on the fruits, veggies, whole grains, dairy, and lean proteins. Another strategy that I've seen people try to use is by greatly driving up the number or duration of workouts or by not eating at all, all in an effort to lose weight. And while these efforts may be successful in the short term, unfortunately the pounds lost in this way are almost entirely due to water loss. And not only are these strategies not sustainable, but is also not what the science shows is the most effective strategy for successful weight loss. This week we have a third lecture from Nancy Siegel, a graduate student in the Master's in Dietetics and Nutrition program. Nancy recently finished a rotation at Ohio State Comprehensive Weight Management Center that addresses weight loss through lifestyle interventions like diet and exercise, as well as medications and bariatric surgeries. She talks about the recent emergence of a new class of weight loss medications that have become extremely popular, GLP-1s. Make sure you watch this week's lecture videos to discover what the science has to show regarding how to effectively lose weight with proper nutrition and exercise.
 Welcome back to Movement is Medicine. I'm your instructor, Dr. Carmen Twain. Fat but fit. It's a paradox for sure. Today we're going to investigate what the science has to show about what we know and what we don't know. So what do we know about this notion of fat but fit? What does the science show us? Well in the late 1980s there were some esteemed authors known as Blair, Cole, and Paffenberger who published a study that demonstrated individuals with low cardiorespiratory fitness, those who are in the bottom 20th percentile, those guys had the highest risk of mortality eight years later when compared to those who are at least moderately fit. Since that time many longitudinal studies have consistently confirmed this notion that males and females as well as healthy and diseased individuals for all cause mortality as well as cardiovascular disease mortality have this risk that is an increased risk of death for those with the lowest levels of fitness. Fat but fit paradox. What is a paradox anyway? It's a seemingly absurd or self-contradictory statement that when investigated may prove well to be true. What we know obesity is related to multiple physical and mental comorbidities and it is a non-deniable risk factor for all cause mortality and cardiovascular disease mortality. It has been suggested however that being fit might attenuate some of the adverse consequences of obesity. In this context in the late 1990s some studies provided the first evidence for what was later known as the fat but fit paradox. These studies demonstrated that all cause cardiovascular disease mortality risk in obese individuals as defined by body mass index, body fat percentage, or waist circumference who are fit is not significantly different from their normal weight and fit counterparts. The science shows us that also being an ideal or quote-unquote normal weight might not be enough. Being fit plays a major role in health. There's a general belief that being an ideal or normal weight is synonymous to being healthy. Yet this notion could be wrong. In many cases a normal weight but unfit individual could have significantly higher risk of all cause and cardiovascular disease mortality than a normal weight fit individual. In addition some will find even more interesting the fact that several studies have reported that ideal or normal weight individuals who are unfit could be at higher risk than obese but fit individuals which may seem paradoxical. Let's look a bit closer at what the science has to show us. Shown here you see a graphical representation of research that shows us the results from multiple studies. Let's walk through this together. What are we looking at here? If we look at the top picture we see that in figure A we're looking at men. We're looking at a lot of men. You can see that we're looking at an n of 25,000 over 25,000 individuals. If we look at figure B it's over 21,000 individuals and figure C over 14,000 individuals. What specifically are we investigating? We're looking at a hazard ratio, a risk of cardiovascular death. Okay we can see that that's the same on each one of these axis for A, B and C and we can see that on the other axis we're looking at males who are either normal weight versus obese. We can see that the data is further stratified by being fit being a blue dot versus being unfit a red triangle. What do we notice in figure A? We notice those that are normal weight have a lower hazard ratio, a lower risk of cardiovascular death than those who are obese. We also notice though that regardless of whether you are normal weight or obese your risk of cardiovascular death is much much lower if you are fit compared to if you are unfit. We see that findings in figure B and C very much mimic the findings in figure A. That is when we look at males according to their body fat percentage we see the same findings or according to waist group we see that fit individuals have a very low all cause death ratio compared to those who are unfit and it doesn't matter if they are low body weight or low waist circumference group or the high waist circumference group. If we look at the bottom graphs D, E and F which examine women and a lot of women over 3,000 women in figure D, 11,000 women in figure E and over 11,000 in figure F we see very similar findings. That is there is an increased risk despite your weight if you are unfit in each one of the categorizations. So the takeaway message is that despite being overweight not just overweight obese you can greatly reduce your risk of all-cause mortality or cardiovascular disease mortality by being fit. What is the impact of our genes versus the impact of our lifestyle? As for many phenotypes our genes and our environment jointly influence both adiposity and our cardio-respiratory fitness. We know that the heritability of both obesity and cardio-respiratory fitness might be up to about 50%. When we examine the heritage family study led by Professor Bouchard and his colleagues we examined environmental factors that are used to explain the rest of that variance. Most impressive amongst environmental factors regular physical activity and particularly that of vigorous intensity has been shown to be the most effective in improving cardio-respiratory fitness. That is we have the power to override our genes by using physical activity as a tool. Let's examine what we still don't know. There is emerging evidence suggesting that moderate to high cardio-respiratory fitness might counteract the negative consequences of obesity on many other health outcomes especially in certain population age groups such as children and adolescents. The fat but fit paradox in children and adolescents. Recent meta-analysis have demonstrated a strong link between cardio-respiratory fitness and cardio metabolic risk factors in children and adolescents providing cut points that more accurately delineate the cardiovascular disease risk. Worldwide reference values that are sex specific and age specific for cardio-respiratory fitness have been published. These two meta-analysis have major practical implications as they allow children's cardio-respiratory fitness levels to be properly interpreted and ranked. Specific information about the fat but fit paradox in the young population is scarce but there is evidence suggesting that having a moderate to high levels of cardio-respiratory fitness may help to attenuate the deleterious effects of metabolic consequences that is ascribed to an excess of total and central adiposity. Research has shown that fat but fit individuals have a 50% reduction in the risk of developing depression compared to their fat and unfit peers. It is very likely that fitness and fatness counteract in their association with many physical and mental health outcomes. You should take note that all the evidence available for the fat but fit paradox comes from observational studies. Consequently, even if most of the studies are prospective cohorts and their findings provide highly valuable prognostic information, that is you're able to make prediction based on certain characteristics, the cause-and-effect relationship cannot be confirmed. Although exercise interventions in obese individuals lowered cardiovascular disease risk even without weight loss, literature is limited regarding whether these improvements in health without weight loss are driven by increases in cardio-respiratory fitness. In other words, studies of the fat but fit paradox need to be carried out using an experimental design. Future exercise-based randomized controlled trials conducted in obese populations should therefore include an accurate assessment of cardio-respiratory fitness before and after intervention so that formal intervention analysis can be performed. Let's weigh some of the take-home messages. Obesity and especially severe morbid obesity, those who have a body mass index greater than 35. This is a major public health problem. Lifestyle intervention programs for obesity with a special focus on exercise and a healthy diet are important public health goals. However, focus should not be placed exclusively on losing weight and fat but also on increasing cardio-respiratory fitness. Since a medium to high cardio-respiratory fitness level may help attenuate the adverse consequences of obesity on health. Ideally, future public health strategies planned for obese individuals should target in parallel both weight and fat reduction and cardio-respiratory fitness improvement. This strategy is especially important if the obese person is classified as unfit. We can utilize practical information to identify those who are at risk. You can see in the table shown here that VO2, the gold standard of aerobic fitness, has been identified for treadmill versus bike tests for various age groups. This data can help sports specialists, physicians, and other healthcare practitioners and even you to classify individuals, yourself, or loved ones. These cut points may be useful in identifying those who are particularly at risk as unfit. When combined together with the internationally accepted definition of obesity, that is a BMI of greater than or equal to 30, this can result in identification of a particularly vulnerable population, those who are underfit and over fat. Which don't we have a moral obligation to try to affect change here? The science may not be complete, but it is clear on this point. There is a high predictability between low fitness and over fatness and death. Let us make sure that we do something about that. If not professionally, we can start on a personal level with ourselves and those who we care most about. Significant and meaningful change has to start somewhere. you
 Welcome back to class everyone. I'm your instructor Dr. Carmen Swain. Today we are going to discuss the truth about weight loss. In today's society we are bombarded with information about what you should eat, what you should not eat, exercises you should do, exercises you should not do, pills you can take, plans you can follow, all to lose weight fast. Guaranteed for only $19.95 a month sometimes. It's a big money business and it's hard to tell who to trust and what's the truth. Today we are going to see what the science has to show. It's not a secret to drop pounds you need to eat less calories and move more. What you may not realize is that in your efforts to lose weight the key is to emphasize diet or exercise at different points in your take off efforts. Because it's easy to get overwhelmed by all the changes we are supposed to make on the road to weight loss. There are so many fitness apps, diet friendly foods, etc. and quite honestly as we've mentioned before behavior change is hard and in the vast majority of cases oftentimes the problem is people take on too much, get overwhelmed and quit altogether. We've talked about behavior change before. It's challenging to do. And if your goal is to lose weight you need to be good at behavior change. Do you know the most popular New Year's resolution? If you don't, the number one New Year's resolution is to lose weight. And do you know how most people plan to go about that? Well usually it's by goal number two, pledging to spend more hours at the gym. Is that what science says is the best plan to lose weight? Actually no, it's not. It is much easier to lose weight by modifying your diet than by trying to exercise more. So you might be thinking, which diet is right for me? Which one should I pick? Let's be super clear. Any diet, whether it be paleo, intermittent fasting, low carb, South Beach, vegetarian, etc. Whether you're cutting portion sizes or eliminating foods like processed foods, carbohydrates or whatever, this diet will result in weight loss. In the short term. The problem is, overwhelming results indicate that in over 98% of cases, weight loss is not sustainable. And that is why the perception to the general public is that no one ever really succeeds at long term weight loss. This belief stems not only from personal perspectives, but also the scientific community. Stunkard and McLaurin Hume's 1959 study of 100 obese individuals indicated that after two years of treatment, only 2% maintained a weight loss of 20 pounds or more. More recently, a New England Journal of Medicine editorial titled Losing Weight, an ill-fated New Year's Resolution echoed the same pessimistic message. So is it even possible to lose weight and keep it off? Yes, yes it is. Let's look at the science of best practices. To lose weight initially, it's important to emphasize reducing caloric intake rather than increasing your physical activity. A study from the University of Missouri highlights these suggestions. In this study, participants went to either Weight Watcher meetings for 12 weeks. Those participants lost 9 pounds. The participants who just joined a gym, they lost 3. I know that's just one study, but many, many studies have replicated these same findings over the past 20 years. The key is clear. To initiate weight loss, it is important you must change your diet rather than trying to exercise more. Once you have selected a diet that is right for you and you start to lose weight, I know, I get it. It's easy to be excited when we see those pounds dropping away. But I also think it's really important to know physiologically what is happening inside our body when we are shedding those pounds. This perspective helps to provide us with the much needed patience required for sustained weight loss. If you look at the graph shown here, it presents the general trend of the percentage of composition of that daily weight loss during the first month of dieting. As you see, approximately 70% of the weight loss over the first week of energy deficit consists of water loss. Thereafter, water loss progressively lessens, representing only about 20% of the weight lost in the second and third weeks. Concurrently, body fat loss accelerates from 25 up to 70%. During the fourth week of dieting, reductions in body fat produce 85% of the weight loss without a further increase in water loss. Protein's contribution to weight loss increases from 5% initially to about 15% after the fourth week. In practical terms, counseling efforts should emphasize that weight loss during the initial attempts to reduce weight, when successful, consists chiefly of water and not fat. It takes approximately four weeks, one month, to establish the desired pattern of fat loss for each pound of weight loss. So what strategies does the science show works to not only lose weight, but to keep weight off? First, let me start by saying there are only a few studies that have followed participants for longer intervals of time. In these studies, approximately 20% of individuals have been able to maintain a weight loss of 5 kg or about 11 pounds or more at the 5-year mark. Because longitudinal research, that is research that goes on and on, follows people year after year, is not only difficult to do, but also difficult to fund, several researchers named Dr. Wing and Dr. Hill have developed a way to do just that. Given the prevailing belief that few individuals succeeded at long-term weight loss, the National Weight Control Registry was developed in 1994 to identify and to investigate the characteristics of individuals who have succeeded at long-term weight loss. The registry is currently composed of a self-selected population of more than 10,000 individuals who are age 18 and older and who have lost at least 13 kg or 30 pounds or more and kept it off for at least one year. When individuals enroll in the registry, they are asked to complete a battery of questionnaires detailing how they originally lost the weight and how they are now maintaining this weight loss. Participants are subsequently followed annually to determine changes in their weight and their weight-related behaviors. Through this process, researchers have been able to identify specific strategies that are very consistent among the successful weight loss individuals. Before we get into what works, let's just start with the biggie that does not work. Portion control. We hear it all the time. You need to eat less calories to lose weight. That doesn't sound that hard. Just use my willpower. I guess I'll just eat a little bit less. It doesn't even sound that hard. The problem with this is this thing your body has that it doesn't sort of like but that it thrives on called homeostasis. Evolutionarily speaking, when you eat less, your body is like, fine, it's okay. There must not be any food available right now. No worries. We'll just slow down metabolism and wait for a wild wildebeest to appear in the thicket. Remember NEAT, that non-exercise activity thermogenesis? Well, this baby also has influence on your metabolism in relation to how much food you eat. And if you don't feed it very much, your NEAT goes down. You feed it a lot and it goes up. But over time, if you keep restricting portion sizes, your body will become grumpy and unhappy and it will start to scream at you. This is an innate survival mechanism meant to keep you from starving to death. And after weeks and weeks of successful portion control and sticking to a specific diet, eventually the screaming at you will cause you to overeat and break your diet until you reach or surpass even your original weight. So please keep this in mind. Portion control almost never works. Let's see what does. There are some strategies that were reported very consistently amongst successful weight loss participants. Consuming a low calorie diet and a low fat diet are amongst the top strategies for successful weight loss. How do you eat a low calorie, low fat diet without doing portion control? Calorie counting? Sidebar here. Most people can eliminate certain foods or reduce their weight loss by eating a low calorie diet. And successfully lose weight for quite a while. But what happens when you stop keeping the log or have that first piece of bread and then another? That's right, the weight creeps back up. And that sounds depressing, doesn't it? Well the science has shown that there is one method that's most successful to weight loss and that is eat more fiber. It makes you feel full. Plants. They are the most nutrient rich source of food on the planet and they are extremely water dense and low in fiber. You don't need to keep a log. You can eat as much as you want. Just eat more whole food plants. Just look at the figure shown here and you can see the results for yourself. Eating more fiber makes sense. Your body is satisfied because you can eat as much or even more than you usually do. When you eat a lot of fiber, it fills you up. You feel satisfied and you feel more satisfied. A good way to start to eat more whole foods is one, try to eliminate processed foods. Things like juice and soda are a good place to start from your diet. And then eat a whole fruit or vegetable or vegetable that you don't want to eat. Another characteristic of national weight control registry members is high levels of physical activity. Women in the registry reported expending an average of 2,500 kcals per week in physical activity and men reported an average of 33,000 kcals per week. These levels of activity would represent about one hour a day of moderate intensity activity. The most common activity reported is walking, reported by over 76% of participants. Another common activity is walking. Another commonly reported strategy was weighing yourself frequently. And the last common strategy amongst those who were successful at weight loss is to consume breakfast daily. The results are clear. If you want to lose weight, the easiest way to get the pounds off are to focus on your diet. The results are also equally clear that to keep that weight off and maintain weight loss, you must incorporate physical activity. Research has consistently shown programs that rely on diet only or exercise only are ineffective in long-term weight loss. When examining meta-analysis of various successful weight loss programs, those who exercise weight loss are not able to maintain weight loss. This is true for different types of populations, diets, and exercise interventions. So let's keep this in mind. It is true that weight loss is a very important factor in weight loss. It takes an average of two months for a new behavior, like eating vegetables before a main course, to turn into a habit. Once you are past the initial hump of making better food choices and that becomes second nature, now it's time to build on that. Once you are past the initial hump of making better food choices and that becomes second nature, now it's time to bump up your exercise. At this point, it won't be overwhelming, and this is a good time to start focusing on getting physical activity during most days. People who work out are nearly twice as likely to keep the pounds from piling back on compared to those who don't. The American Journal of Preventative Medicine and other research studies indicate that 90% of people who have kept off 30 pounds or more do an hour of exercise each day, which is similar to findings from the NASA study. There's no coincidence. When you exercise, you activate hormones that tend to favor using more fat as your fuel. And of course, you need to continue to eat well. Exercise does give you a little leeway, but it doesn't cover consistent fat. And of course, you need to continue to eat well. Exercise does give you a little leeway, but it doesn't cover consistent 3,000 calorie meals. That is, you can't exercise your way out of a bad diet. Of course, nobody can stay in dieting mode forever, which is why you want to embrace diet and exercise change as part of your healthy lifestyle. Emphasizing the positives, like how much better you feel, helps to cancel out any sort of sense or deprivation. And if that isn't motivating enough, exercise and good diet comes with built-in bonuses. You're likely to miss it if you stop. Being physically active isn't something you just turn on and turn off. It becomes part of who you are and how you feel. And let's not forget to drink our water. Scientists have examined if pre-meal water consumption facilitates weight loss amongst overweight and obese middle-aged and older adults. And they've also looked to examine if the pre-meal water consumption will reduce meal energy intake and if that's sustained after a 12-week period of increased water consumption. In this study, 48 adults, age 55 to 75 years of age with a BMI of 25 to 40 were assigned to one of two groups. A hypochloric diet plus 500 milliliters of water prior to each daily meal, known as the water group, or group 2, the hypochloric diet alone, the non-water group. At baseline and week 12, each participant had a test meal. They got to choose what they wanted to eat and how much they wanted to eat. Meal energy intake was assessed at each test meal and body weight was assessed weekly for 12 weeks. After 12 weeks, weight loss was 4.4 pounds greater in the water group than in the non-water group. And the water group showed a 44% greater decline in weight loss over the 12 weeks than the non-water group. The test meal energy intake was lower in the water group than the non-water group conditions at baseline, but not at week 12. Thus, when combined with a hypochloric diet, consuming 500 milliliters of water, approximately 2 cups of water prior to each meal, lends to greater weight loss than a hypochloric diet alone in middle-aged and older adults. This may be due in part due to an acute reduction in energy intake following the water ingestion. Another study examined whether increased intake of drinking water was associated with weight loss over 12 months in free-living women who were assigned to four popular weight loss diets. Mixed models were used to test for effects for absolute and relative increases in drinking water on changes in weight and body composition, controlling for baseline status, diet group, and changes in other beverage intake, the amount and consumption of foods consumed, and physical activity. Results indicate that absolute and relative increases in drinking water were associated with significant loss of body weight and fat over time, independent of the other covariates. The authors of this study suggest that drinking water may promote weight loss in overweight dieting women. Let's make sure we dodge these common exercise mistakes. One of the most common errors is to consider your workouts as free license to binge. Don't do it! One recent study found that people who were told that a one-mile walk was for exercise ate about twice as much after the walk as those who were told the outing was for exercise. Second, use every spare minute wisely. Finding an extra half hour to slip in a workout isn't always easy, so have a backup plan. Even a 10-minute cardio video can help to keep you on track. And no, you do not have to stick to the same routine every time. Do it! Don't be afraid to mix it up. You can't perform the same exercise over and over and over and expect to get the very same benefits. Women, particularly, who start a program tend to stick with cardio. But ladies, you need strength training. You need to be able to do it. And finally, don't give in to energy drain. A top excuse for not exercising is, I'm too tired. Just fake yourself out. Say, hey, self, I'm just going to go for a walk for 10 minutes. And most likely, you're going to get a lot of energy. I'm too tired. Just fake yourself out. Say, hey, self, I'm just going to go for a walk for 10 minutes. And most likely, you'll go longer. Because exercise energizes you.
 All right, everybody, my name is Nancy and I am a graduate teaching assistant for this course. I'm super excited to bring this mini lecture on weight loss medications to you as it is super popular in the media today. So what are they? They're prescription medications that are administered orally or subcutaneously. This just means by mouth or by injection and that injection site is typically around the abdomen and you're also going to be referred or seeing them referred to as anti-obesity medications which most likely is going to be in research studies. So we know that they help patients with overweight and obesity achieve weight loss. They reduce weight regain and they decrease risk of obesity related comorbidities. And so these comorbidities are things such as type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, dyslipidemia or sleep apnea. And so what are the prescription rules? Providers typically provide at their own discretion. Typically though we're seeing that they're for patients with a BMI of 30 or greater, a BMI of 27 or greater with a comorbidity of type 2 diabetes, hypertension, stuff that we talked about in that first slide or a failed attempt at a lifestyle change. So you can see how this with providers prescribing at their discretion, it's very unique on a patient to patient basis. And so also that's going to indicate the type of relationship a patient has with their provider, maybe the easier route or how difficult it is to be prescribed one of these medications. Another thing I want you to think about is the BMI classifications, right? So we've learned that BMI is a calculation that does not involve the consideration of muscle mass or lean body mass. And so thinking about how that 27 is in the overweight category over here, populations such as athletes typically are considered overweight or potentially even obese, just the amount of muscle mass that they have on their bodies. And so this is just a rare area of discussion. I'm just opening up for just questions that we even ask ourselves as, will this kind of indicate maybe not the right people being prescribed these medications or should we move to some other qualifications rather than this BMI calculation for the prescription rules? But anyway, it's just a thought. So the mechanism, glucagon-like peptide one or GLP-1 receptor agonist are what we know is in the medication that is what's causing this weight loss phenomenon. And so it's a hormone that's produced in the gut or the intestines and it is responsible for regulating appetite in this sense. And so historically these have been used for management of type 2 diabetes because they help us relate blood sugar as well or blood glucose. So you can see here on the right, this is a really good figure where it just shows us clearly kind of the mechanism of how this is happening. So the receptor agonist bind to the GLP-1 receptors in the hypothalamus of the brain. And these are going to inhibit those hunger cues like neuropeptide Y and AGRP. And so when these are inhibited, we become less hungry or we have increased satiety. And so that hence happens to have reduced hunger, reduced energy intake and reduced food cravings. So you can see why overall we see weight loss with these medications because we're being less hungry. So this is another figure from a research article that I think really makes it easy for us to understand if we're not too keen on all the nutrition background. And so basically we can see that the hypothalamus is where those receptors lie. And so the receptor agonists are latching on, going to increase our appetite or increase our satiety, decrease our appetite. And what does this do to the stomach? And so this is going to decrease gastric emptying and also decrease gastrointestinal motility. So we can think about that as slowing down digestion time of food, right? So it's going to keep food in our stomachs for longer, which is going to take up more space and then hence tell our brains like, hey, I'm not hungry. I don't have any more space. Don't give me more food right now. And because of this, we're also going to see pancreas having that glucose dependent insulin release. And so insulin is only going to be released when we have higher levels of blood, the blood sugar that needs to be controlled. So we're going to see with this, that's going to kind of drive the weight loss factor because we're constantly having a slower digestion rate, which is constantly having those appetite cues being suppressed. And so the last slide showed some of the brand names, but we're going to get into the brand names here. So currently there are six FDA approved medications for weight loss. And so they can be divided up into here, but we're going to focus on the names in parentheses, or typical brand names you're seeing in the markets. So Zenical is the one unique medication out of all these six because it decreases fat absorption. It does this by inhibiting the release of pancreatic lipases. And so basically what you need to know is that our body's going to absorb less fat from the food we eat, hence contributing to this weight loss factor. Then kiwi's ma and contrary are those ones that are going to decrease appetite and show us early satiety. These first three also are typically pill form, which is just something interesting to note. And then here we come into sexenda and bogovian and ozempic, which I believe ozempic is probably the most popular one people know of, but these are our GLP-1 agonists. They're going to regulate our appetite and then increase the early satiety. And then zep bound and M. curvy do basically the same thing. And so they all have very similar mechanisms of actions, but they do also give very similar symptoms as well. But we can see that those last four are also daily or weekly injections, but those are going to be those ones administered subcutaneously rather than a pill. And so what are the side effects? Thinking about the side effects that come with the medications and also the route of administration is really what's going to help the provider and the healthcare team figure out what medication is probably right for the patient. And so we see nausea, headache, constipation, vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, or stomach discomfort in general. Interesting thing to note is that patients might not see any of these. They might see one. People on the same medications might see totally different symptoms. It's just really on a case by case basis. Sometimes these symptoms can be so jarring that it decreases the quality of life of a patient and they might rather just not rely on weight loss medications and they could go other routes, but it really is very specific to people. So how much weight is lost? We know that on average, greater than or equal to 15% body rate reduction is typically being seen right now. There are smaller reductions. Around 5 to 10% are seen, but typically they're up to 15%. And then if less than 5% after three months of weight loss is seen, then the discontinuation is considered. Or you might switch to different medications. It's really on a case by case basis again. So I actually had the pleasure of being an intern at the weight management clinic here at Martha Morehouse over the summer with a weight management dietitian. And Tuesday through Friday, we got to sit in clinic talking to patients that were prescribed weight loss medications all day. So I really got to get some good experience with stories. And typically if they weren't having success, we would dive into behavior or lifestyle changes that were happening as well, or we would see them cycle through different medications. So it's really interesting. We'll talk about this later. We've seen greater reductions with exercise and lifestyle changes with patients on these medications. So once again, I'm going to talk about some of that real world application I saw at the clinic. We see patients, how do we tell them to fuel with no less or low hunger cues? How do we tell them to obtain adequate protein to prevent this muscle mass loss? And how can we tell them to obtain adequate micronutrients? Small really big questions with somebody who's losing weight pretty rapidly. So let's start with the hunger cues. We can focus on liquid calories, small frequent meals, or setting reminders to eat. Liquid calories are going to be somebody's best friend when they don't really have an appetite. This is something that's pretty convenient to get in. And setting reminders to eat might sound pretty silly to somebody, but it becomes very pertinent and very real when you just really aren't getting those hunger cues. It can be really helpful for somebody to be reminded to eat. So protein, we talk about high quality weight loss. And what that means is we're going to preserve that lean body mass or muscle mass, and we're going to lose the fat mass. So one thing we would talk about is protein at every meal, really getting a good source of protein. But think about how much of that, how many of your daily calories is protein? So we know the AMDR is 10 to 35% of calories per day. But we see these patients on medications reaching the higher limit of that protein per day recommendation. We can also think about that as a 1.5 gram per kilogram per day of body weight, which we know that the RDA is 0.8. So 1.5 is a pretty big jump, but that's because we really want to make sure these patients are keeping that muscle mass and not going into a state of sarcopenia or getting that way. And then obtaining adequate micronutrients. And so you can think about somebody who's reducing caloric intake from what they have eventually done. They're going to be getting less calories, but they're also going to be getting less micronutrients. And so when we talk about a good diet for somebody on a weight loss medication regimen, it's really priding on nutrient density. And so that is optimizing fruit and vegetable intake really simply, but also recommending safe and quality supplementation if that's necessary for somebody as well. And so here's just a real world example. So the company Abbott is now advertising this Protality Shake that is marketed towards patients using GLP-1s because it has an ingredient called HMB. And so if you're familiar with the sports world or sports nutrition, you might have heard of this supplement, right? Hydroxy methyl butyrate. It's shown to help slow muscle breakdown. But one thing that Abbott does really well is coin in the research to their products. And so they're saying that three grams of HMB has been shown to support muscle health. So this would be great for somebody who is on a weight loss medication, right? They want to keep that muscle mass. They want to keep on their lean body mass. So they're saying if they have two of their shakes per day, you can get these benefits. Either way, I like it because it's convenient for somebody with a low appetite, somebody like on these medications, because it's going to be a really easy way to get in those calories. And plus, I like the protein content, the great way to get in protein. And when we talk about vitamins and minerals, these shakes like this normally have added nutrients. So we can see here on the nutrition facts label, we're seeing some vitamin D, calcium, magnesium, all good stuff. So another railroad application, how do you tell somebody to eat with no appetite? So this is a sample day of eating and taking around 35% of protein calories, so 130 grams of protein per day. Taking in this day of eating real quick, we can kind of see that there's a lot of eating occurrences. What you're going to notice is that they're pretty small meals. We got small portions, but high eating occurrences. This is a type of day that is going to work really well for somebody who can only take in a little bit of food each time, do that slow gastric emptying or that food staying in their system for just a bit longer. You can see here that we have two occurrences of the protein drink. That's because this person hypothetically needs to rely on a little bit of extra liquid calories because they just can't stomach food throughout the day. Another really interesting point is that each of these eating occurrences have a good source of protein. If it comes down to it, finishing the protein source each meal first before venturing out into the other ingredients is something also that patients can kind of focus on. So we're always trying to promote that protein, promote that preservation of lean body mass and the loss of the fat mass as we have this high quality weight loss or strive to have the high quality weight loss as we can. So what do we know? We think we know that there needs to be lifetime adherence to these meds. So what we'll say is that research is still being published, still being continuously looked at, but we know that there is weight regain after stopping medication. So that's one thing to keep in note is that weight and the number on the scale is very sensitive to this population and people who are on weight loss medications. It can be very frustrating and it can be a large setback when somebody thinks that they've reached their goal weight, then they discontinue the medications and then they see that weight come right back on. That's something that healthcare team needs to be aware of and watch out for when this process starts to happen. We can also look at the long-term symptoms for specific medications. And so that means, let's say this patient has nausea every single time they administer the medications, but they're rocking with the nausea because they want to see that weight loss and they're having success. It's almost like, how long can somebody have that nausea weekly and still be happy, have a good quality of life with the medication? So that's something to think about. But also for us, there is coined research saying that benefits of physical activity and lifestyle change promote sustained weight loss. So we're seeing greater reductions in body fat and body weight, which is awesome. Research shows that lifestyle and good nutrient density of a diet can really help with physical activity and sustained weight loss. Let's have a full picture to the weight loss medications and really add in that behavior change is really promising. So that's it. I hope you learned something interesting and new about weight loss medications. I hope this lecture inspired you to understand the correct populations who should be utilizing weight loss medications and all of the information that's within the media and inspires you to continue to learn more about this growing topic. So thank you.
 Welcome back to our wrap-up discussion. Today, let's finish our conversation about weight loss. This week, you learned about weight loss myths and how diet and exercise are implemented in weight loss strategies. Now let's discuss how to combine our knowledge of nutrition and fitness to see the health benefits of weight loss. Like other types of change, weight loss requires behavior change, which can be really difficult to commit to. This behavior change can be made easier though by losing weight via a step-by-step process. Weight management requires a balance between both physical activity and a healthy diet, but it may be best to begin by improving your diet alone. Why is this? Well studies have shown that diet, including the volume of food consumed and how many nutrients the food contains, is more impactful initially to weight loss than just looking at exercise. But in the long term, to be successful at keeping weight off, a combination of a healthy diet and consistent physical activity is key. A healthy person absolutely needs to manage both, but it is easier to begin by doing one step at a time. It's also important to keep in mind that eating well with the right amount of fuel and being physically active improves health regardless of body size. So engaging in these behaviors improves energy, mood, sleep, and many other benefits we've shared already this semester. Exactly. And as you learned in lecture, losing weight occurs by utilizing more calories than you ingest. But when you exercise, you burn a lot of calories, right? Yes. But also, you get very hungry as a result of all that exercise. Keep in mind, if you start your weight loss journey by only exercising, you may not make much of an impact if your diet is still unchanged. Or if this excess exercise causes you to ingest as many calories as you just burned. Breaking behaviors up into multiple steps is a great way to develop healthy habits. Even if weight loss is not a personal goal that you have, it's likely that you know someone or you have someone that you care about who would like to lose weight. It is important to know that change does not happen overnight. Research supports that successful behavior change results from slowly adapting to a new behavior with small, repeated successes rather than starting a change abruptly or implementing too much change all at once. Small steps, repeatedly taken, is the best way to create sustainable lifestyle changes.
