 Hi class and welcome back to Food is Function and Movement is Medicine. The topic of today's discussion is sleep. As you will learn, sleep is crucial to allowing your body to recover and maintain homeostasis. So let's discuss how to maximize your sleep for better performance. Carmen, how important is sleep to you? And do you have any ways that you like to measure your sleep or ensure that you are well rested for the next day? Why yes, yes I do. A good night's sleep is imperative to living a healthy lifestyle and should be considered as another pillar of lifestyle medicine. Sleep allows your body to recover and heal from the day. Appropriate sleep sharpens your mind and allows your body to physically perform to its maximum ability. I really like new technologies like the Aura, the Whoop, Apple Watches and other fitness devices that can be used to monitor your sleep by tracking total hours, sleep interruptions and sleep quality. These tools are a new and welcome way to support good sleep practices. It is really convenient how technology can help us learn about our individual sleep habits that we would not otherwise be able to track. Yet screen time from our technological devices close to bedtime is one of the main barriers to quality and sufficient sleep. The blue light emitted from the devices interferes with the melatonin surge we need to fall asleep naturally. This topic is another example of how technology can be both harmful and also something we can leverage for our health. Paying attention to your sleep and being well rested can improve health drastically. I would encourage everyone to start tracking their sleep. If you have the technology available, use that or just simply do the old fashioned way. Start a journal. Write down when you go to bed and when you wake up. Also be sure to rate your energy level that day on a scale of one to ten. You can learn a lot about yourself, your mood, your performance, your own personal health when you take the time to review your sleep habits over time. Thanks Carmen. I agree. Stay tuned to this week's lecture videos to learn more about the effects of sleep or lack of sleep on your health and performance.
 The one activity you spend most of your life doing is sleeping. The average human spends 79 years on Earth and 26 of that, about one third, is spent sleeping. She also spends about seven years trying to get to sleep. But what's so special about sleeping? It turns out, a lot. Sleeping boosts your mental health, improves your physical well-being, your immunity, your weight regulation, and fertility. Welcome back to class, everyone. I'm Dr. Carmen Swain, your instructor for this course that examines fitness and your health. And today, we're going to explore how to make you sleep like a baby. Americans aren't spending enough time snoozing. In the last Gallup poll, the average American slept 6.8 hours a night, with 40% of Americans banking less than six hours. The nation hasn't always been this sleep deprived. If we look back to 1910, people slept an average of nine hours per night. Our culture of sleeplessness has been propelled by technologies like the light bulb and the internet, which have given us more opportunities to stay awake in an increasingly 24-7 world. But this modern day trend poses many health risks. A host of studies and reports have linked insufficient sleep to depression, ADHD, obesity, type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and Alzheimer's. Back in 2014, the CDC labeled sleep deprivation a public health epidemic, with over 70 million adults suffering from a sleep disorder. Sleeplessness is also connected to other severe consequences. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration estimates that drowsy driving causes 1,550 deaths and 40,000 injuries annually in the United States. And what about kids? Are they getting enough sleep? Technology is part of our lives. Not just our lives, but children's too. It provides entertainment, educational opportunities. But could it be hurting children? And how exactly is that? Research shows that technology at bedtime does affect sleep duration. And it doesn't matter if that technology comes in the form of TV, phone, video game, or computer. When technology is used before bedtime, there's a reduction in hours of sleep. When we examine the research and examine the different types of technology versus non-technology activities, things like reading a book or taking a bath, we see that those that engage in technology have about an hour less of sleep per night with the use of tech. What's the big deal? Well, new research reveals that one hour of sleep deprivation could be a very big deal. Children who fall short by just one hour per night have a higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes. This alarming data point comes at a time when fewer Americans and children than ever are getting the daily recommended amount of sleep. The search for sleep has become a cultural obsession, fueling the rise of an entire industry. But with glaring laptop screens and grueling work schedules keeping us awake, sleepless nights aren't going away anytime soon. Interestingly, athletic teens sleep better than their couch potato peers and also have fewer problems concentrating at school. Teachers in Switzerland asked 434 adolescents with an average age of 17 to keep a log of their sleep and daytime habits for one week. The 258 student athletes who were part of the quote Swiss Olympic classes exercised about 17 and a half hours a week. The 176 sedentary teens exercised for only about 4.5 hours a week. The teen athletes reported waking fewer times during the night, having higher energy levels during the day, and a greater ability to concentrate than their less active peers. This study demonstrates that in adolescence, being an athlete is highly predictive of high sleep quality and also shorter sleep latency. Sleep onset latency is the duration of time from turning the light off to falling asleep. Usually sleep latency is less than 20 minutes. The study also indicates that being an athlete is highly indicative of low daytime tiredness and higher concentration during the day. Most Americans are aware they aren't getting enough sleep, which has spurred the growth of an entire industry. Back in the 1980s, insomniacs were simply told, sleep more. The concept of sleep medicine didn't really take off until the 90s and early 2000s, when medical terms like sleep disorder and sleep aid entered common use. Consumers spent $41 billion on sleep-related products in 2015. A more recent figure showed that figure to be $52 billion. This consumer category includes much more than just prescription and over-the-counter sleep aids, starting with the introduction of SelectComfort's Sleep Number Bed. In the 1980s, this $13 billion mattress industry has innovated to keep consumers from lying awake. We also see meditation and mindfulness as being promoted as ways to get a good night's sleep. And sleep-defrived consumers are turning to tech-enabled devices. Some products use sensors that sit on or under mattresses to track movement, sounds, and breathing. Apps like the Sleep Cycle, SleepBot, and Pillow use smartphones to do the same. It also time alarms so that users wake up during their lightest sleep phase. Insomniacs can even download apps that play relaxing sounds and adult bedtime stories designed specifically to calm the mind. Organizations of all types are adapting to America's need for some shut-eye. Silicon Valley has led the charge, implementing flexible work schedules and other sleep-supporting perks. HubSpot, a marketing software company, has a dedicated nap room, complete with a hammock and cloud-covered walls. It makes sense. Well-rested workers make better decisions, are less stressed, and are less prone to make errors. Likewise, studies show that students whose schools that start later have better impulse control earn higher grades and aren't involved in as many car accidents. Researchers don't completely understand how exactly physical activity improves sleep. We may never be able to pinpoint the mechanism in full because it is multifocal. However, what we do know is that moderate aerobic exercise increases the amount of slow-wave sleep you can attain. Slow-wave sleep refers to deep sleep, where the brain and the body have a chance to rejuvenate. Exercise can also work to stabilize your mood and decompress the mind. An important cognitive process that is important for naturally transitioning into sleep. The timing of exercise relative to sleep may matter. Some people may find that exercising close to bedtime seems to keep them up at night. How does working out affect the mind? Aerobic exercise causes the body to release endorphins. These chemicals can create a level of activity in the brain that keeps some people awake. These individuals should exercise at least one to two hours before going to bed, giving endorphin levels times to wash out and the brain time to wind down. Exercise also raises your core body temperature. The effect of exercise in some people is like taking a hot shower that wakes you up in the morning. Elevation in core body temperature signals the body clock that it's time to be awake. After about 30 to 90 minutes, the core body temperature starts to fall. This decline will help to facilitate sleepiness. Despite these biological responses to exercise, some people find the time of day they exercise doesn't make a difference at all. Whether it's in the early morning or close to bedtime, they'll all see a benefit relative to their sleep. Non-REM sleep, known as slow wave or deep sleep, is super important. This phase is essential for muscle recovery and restoring the body. You need to ensure that you get enough time in non-REM cycle. Sleep has a significant impact on muscle recovery. If you don't get enough of it, you're not going to feel rested in the morning and your muscles will not recover properly. Aside from being groggy the next day, another pitfall of not getting enough quality sleep is that it affects all your efforts in the gym. While you may be able to quote unquote function just fine on only a few hours of sleep, doing so still short changes your body composition goals. To understand this, let's first understand the two main stages of sleep so that we can better understand the sleep's impact on muscle recovery. REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep, occurs in cycles of about 90 to 120 minutes throughout the night and it accounts for about a quarter of total sleep time in adult humans. REM sleep dominates the latter half of the sleep period, especially the hours before waking. REM sleep provides the energy to the brain that supports it during the waking hours and is necessary for restoring the mind. Non-REM sleep, also known as deep sleep. This phase is essential for muscle recovery and for restoring the body. This sleep accounts for about 40% of total sleep time. During this phase, your blood pressure drops and your breathing becomes deeper and slower. Your brain is resting with very little activity, so the blood supply available to your muscle increases. This is the result of a non-REM sleep cycle, delivering extra amounts of oxygen and nutrients, which facilitate their healing and growth. Muscles and body tissues are rejuvenated during non-REM sleep. So now that we know that the non-REM sleep cycle is the most important for muscle recovery, is the secretion of growth hormone. As your body enters into non-REM deep sleep stage, your pituitary gland releases a shot of growth hormone that stimulates tissue growth and muscle repair. But not enough sleep causes a sharp decline in growth hormone secretion. Growth hormone deficiency is associated with loss of muscle mass and reduced exercise capacity. So sleeping for 7-9 hours per night is crucial, especially if you are looking to change body composition, increase muscle mass, and or if you want to be ready for your personal training session the next day. Sleep enhances muscle recovery through protein synthesis and human growth hormone release. If you want to grow or lean out, stop procrastinating and get to sleep. The idea that exercise and sleep are somehow correlated may not be shocking news to you, but the benefits of exercise on sleep don't just apply to gym rats, athletes, and marathon runners. You may have resigned yourself to a life of mediocre sleep knowing that you don't follow a vigorous fitness routine, but that's simply not true. Even a small increase in the number of steps you take each day, trying the stairs, walking to class, riding your bike to campus could make your nightly snoozes more restful. And here's the science to back it up. A study by researchers at Brandeis University published by the National Sleep Foundation found evidence that physical activity, even low impact exercise as commonplace as walking, can help improve an individual's quality of sleep. To determine if low impact physical activity like walking positively affected sleep in healthy adults, researchers observed 59 participants over a four week period. During this time, each individual participated in an intervention aimed at increasing their daily steps as the primary outcome. According to research results and conclusion, more activity was consistently linked to deeper Zs for participants. While this was an observational study and therefore does not have a direct or causal link yet, these positive correlations between increased daily movement and better sleep suggest that even a slight boost in activity could reward you with life changing results. These findings were supported by a similar study which quantified the number of steps per person and correlated that directly with improved sleep quality. That is, more steps equals not only more sleep, but better sleep. What about people with sleep disorders like insomnia? Insomnia is a common sleep disorder that can make it hard to fall asleep, hard to stay asleep, or cause you to wake up too early and not be able to get back to sleep. You may still feel tired when you wake up. Insomnia can sap not only your energy level and mood, but also your health, your work performance, and quality of life. How much sleep is enough varies from person to person, but most adults need seven to eight hours a night. At some point, many adults experience short-term insomnia, which lasts for days or maybe even weeks. It's usually the result of stress or a traumatic event. But some people have long-term or chronic insomnia that lasts for a month or even more. Insomnia may be the primary problem, or it may be associated with other medical conditions or medications. But you don't have to put up with sleepless nights. Simple changes in your daily habits can often help. Scientists have studied the effects of exercise upon sedentary men and women in their 60s who are diagnosed with insomnia. The participants were involved in a 16-week course, an exercise intervention, and it was found that those who were in the exercise intervention not only awoke less often, but they also slept longer than the study participants who did not exercise. Interestingly, these results only began after the exercise intervention was complete, not during the 16 weeks, indicating the importance of chronic and regular exercise as a treatment approach. Another finding was that volunteers who had slept poorly had significantly shorter workouts the following day. Overall study results observed that improvement after chronic exercise was similar to improvement after the use of prescribed drugs. There are many studies that show people who are more physically active sleep longer and more deeply than those who are sedentary. But what about those with sleep apnea? For adults with sleep apnea, a dangerous condition that stresses the heart and repeatedly interrupts sleep when breathing briefly slows or stops, resulting in increased blood pressure, links to higher risks for a host of cardiovascular problems, including strokes, heart attacks, heart failure, and fluttering heartbeats called arrhythmias. But an exercise program that combined brisk walking and weight training cut the severity of this disorder by a quarter. That's as much as some kinds of surgery. And the most compelling point of this research was that this 25% reduction was achieved without any reduction in body weight. Being overweight is a well-known risk factor for sleep apnea, and previous studies have shown that losing weight may improve the condition. But for a 25% reduction due to weight loss, you actually need to lose about 10% of your body weight. For study participants who weighed on average more than 220 pounds means they'd have to lose 22 pounds for them to achieve the same benefit that was achieved just through simple exercise. A separate analysis on the same sleep study volunteers found that exercise also improved daytime sleepiness, decreased fatigue, and sharpened thinking compared to a program of light stretching. And further research indicates the intensity of your exercise may have something to do with this. Research indicates that the more vigorously you exercise, the less likely you are to suffer from sleep apnea. Can you really sleep to lose weight? In common weight loss advice, get more sleep should figure just as prominently with eat less and move more. There is strong evidence that lack of sleep is contributing to the obesity epidemic. Among the behavioral factors that have been shown to impede weight loss, insufficient sleep is by far the most prominent factor gaining attention and recognition. A 2010 study in which participants were randomly assigned to sleep five and a half hours versus eight and a half hours every night for 14 days. And participants in the study all cut their daily calorie intake by 680 calories and also slept in a lab. The participants who slept for five and a half hours lost 55 percent less body fat and 60 percent more of their lean body mass than compared to those who slept longer. In other words, the sleep deprived people held onto their fat tissue and instead lost muscle. And in another recent study, researchers examined 245 women in a six month weight loss program and found that those who slept more than seven hours a night and those who reported better sleep quality were 33 percent more likely to succeed in their weight loss efforts. In a large analysis of the sleep exercise link, researchers looked at 36 studies, a meta-analysis including 635,000 people from around the world and found that adults who didn't get enough sleep were 50 percent more likely to be obese and children who didn't get enough sleep were 90 percent more likely to be obese compared with those who got more sleep. We know that people's success in weight loss programs varies greatly, but researchers suggest that including sleep advice within weight loss programs can greatly improve success rates. While the exact way that losing sleep may contribute to obesity is not completely acceptable, studies have shown that lack of sleep affects the part of the brain that controls pleasure eating. It's also been shown that levels of hormones, leptin, ghrelin, cortisol, and orexin, all of which are involved in appetite or eating, are affected by lack of sleep. Healthcare providers might be better able to help their overweight and obese patients by screening for sleep disorders. Future research should examine ways that people could get more sleep. Successful weight management is complicated and a good understanding of the root causes of weight gain and barriers to weight management is essential to success. While getting more sleep is not the solution for everyone who is struggling to lose weight, an accumulating body of evidence suggests that sleeping habits should not be overlooked when prescribing a weight reduction program to a patient with obesity. Sleep plays an important role in weight management. People who sleep enough have lower body mass indexes than people who do not. And recent research suggests that sleep deprivation causes weight gain. In a study of women who only had four hours of sleep at night, they ate an additional 329 calories the next day than they did after they slept for nine hours. Men ate 263 calories more. In another study, 11 volunteers spent 14 days at a sleep center on two occasions. During one period, they slept five and a half hours a night, and during the other, they slept eight and a half hours. When the participants were sleep deprived, they increased their nighttime snacking and were more likely to choose high carbohydrate snacks. So how exactly does sleep help you to lose weight? Well, let's find out. Studies have shown that lack of sleep affects the parts of the brain that control pleasure eating. It's also been shown that levels of hormones leptin and ghrelin, cortisol and orexin, all of which are involved in appetite or eating, are highly affected by lack of sleep. The biggest revelation about the connection between sleep and weight loss, and the biggest challenge for you if you're not getting at least seven solid hours of sleep each night, is that sleeping too little impacts your hormone levels in ways that can undermine the efforts of even the most determined dieter. There are several hormones that link sleep with weight loss. Leptin and ghrelin are two hormones that play major roles in stimulating and suppressing your appetite. Ghrelin's job is to boost your appetite, increase fat production, and make your body grow, which are undesirable effects once you've passed your teenage years. It's pretty easy to figure out why this hormone is the last thing a dieter needs to have circulating around in excess. On the other hand, leptin is responsible for suppressing hunger. Leptin is the hormone that says, Unfool! Back away from the table and put that fork down. Lack of sleep lowers the levels of leptin in your blood and heightens the levels of ghrelin, which results in an increase of appetite. So after even one night of too little sleep, leptin and ghrelin become little dietary gremlins, bent on diet-wrecking mischief. The lower leptin levels mean that you still feel hungry after you eat. And ghrelin, for its part, it magnifies the problem by stimulating your appetite, which sets the stage for a day of high simple carbohydrates and high calorie feasting after a restless night. We've all been there before, right? But the good news is that the reverse is also true. Getting enough sleep decreases hunger and will therefore help you to lose weight. Another important hormone mentioned before that is affected by sleep is growth hormone. During sleep, your pituitary gland secretes more growth hormone than during your waking hours. Growth hormones stimulate cell regeneration, reproduction, and growth. These hormones are also known to aid you in building muscles. This is why higher levels of growth hormones result in heightened metabolism. With a higher metabolism, you burn energy faster, which will also lead to easier weight loss. We've all heard the phrase, beauty sleep. But is there actually any truth to it? Can sleep actually make you more attractive? Researchers from Sweden thought they'd find the answer. The researchers asked 25 university students, some male and some female, to be guinea pigs in their sleep experiment. The volunteers, who were given payment for their help, were sent home with a kit that would measure their nighttime movements to check that they had not cheated and slept when they should not have. The volunteers were asked to get a good night's sleep for two consecutive nights. And then, a week later, they were asked to restrict themselves to only four hours of sleep per night for two nights in a row. The researchers took makeup-free photos of the volunteers after both the good and the bad sleep sessions. Next, they asked 122 strangers. Females and males living in Sweden's capital city of Stockholm to have a look at the photos and rate them on attractiveness, health, sleepiness, and trustworthiness. As well as asking them, how much would you like to socialize with this person in the picture? The strangers were good at judging if the person they were looking at was tired and if they were sleepy, their attractiveness score suffered. The strangers also said they would be less willing to socialize with the tired students, who they also perceived to be less healthy. It's evolutionary. People don't want to hang out with people who might be ill, whereas someone who looks energetic and fit will hold a lot more appeal. The strangers were good at judging if the person they were looking at was tired and if they were sleepy, their attractiveness score suffered. The strangers also said they would be less willing to socialize with the tired students, who they also perceived to be less healthy. It's all part of the evolutionary process. People don't want to hang around people who might be tired and ill, whereas someone who looks rested also appears energetic and fit and will thus hold a lot more appeal. So let's wrap it up with some takeaway messages related to sleep and exercise. Exercisers say they sleep better. People who exercise report better sleep than those who say they don't exercise. More than three-fourths of exercisers said their sleep quality was very good or fairly good in the past two weeks, compared to just over one-half of non-exercisers. Vigorous exercisers report the best sleep. Vigorous exercisers are almost twice as likely as non-exercisers to say, I had a good night's sleep, every night or almost every night, and they are the least likely to report sleep problems. Non-exercisers are the sleepiest and have the highest risk for sleep apnea. Nearly one-fourth of non-exercisers qualify as sleepy, using a standard screening measure. Only 12% of exercisers qualify as sleepy, and 44% of non-exercisers showed a moderate risk for sleep apnea, compared to 26% of light exercisers and 19% of vigorous exercisers. We also know less time sitting is associated with better sleep and health. Those who sit for fewer than eight hours a day were significantly more likely to report very good sleep quality. And lastly, exercising at any time of the day appears to be good for sleep. Contrary to the long-lasting sleep hygiene advice, exercising close to bedtime was not associated with poorer sleep quality. In fact, exercise was linked to better sleep, no matter what time of day. So let's make sure we exercise to ensure a better night's rest.
 Well, let's talk about sleep and appetite. The National Sleep Foundation recommends a sleep duration of 7 to 9 hours per night for adults. Accurate estimates of sleep duration are difficult to achieve at the population level as they are mainly derived from questionnaires asking about typical sleep duration in the week vs weekends or work nights and free nights, or sometimes average sleep in 24 hours including naps. In the US, current estimates are consistent with other areas around the globe in which 36% of adults age 20 or older sleep for 6 hours or less on weekdays or on workdays. What effect does this have on our weight or our nutrition? In the assigned reading for this week, the meta-analysis from Fatima found an association but could not determine a cause between obesity and poor sleep. However, there is a large body of research that shows that extra weight increases a person's risk for sleep complications like sleep apnea. We also know that sleep deprivation can lead to weight gain, and poor sleep habits can make it hard to lose weight. Let's take a little deeper dive into the mechanisms behind these associations' causes. We have several appetite hormones that really determine how much we want to eat and when we want to eat it. Some of those major appetite hormones are highlighted here in red. Leptin is a hormone that decreases appetite. It's produced by our fat cells. So leptin levels are lower when you're thin and higher when you have extra fat. Many people with obesity have built up resistance to leptin, meaning that they might release large amounts of leptin but the body doesn't respond to it. Researchers have targeted leptin regulation to prevent or treat obesity, but they have not been successful at lowering it long-term. Short-term fasting results in a fast, significant decline in leptin. Thus, your appetite grows. That's a survival mechanism that's been around since human beings have been around. When we eat, leptin levels begin to rise again and return to normal. Another important appetite hormone is ghrelin. Ghrelin increases appetite and is released primarily in the stomach and the intestines. Ghrelin levels increase before meals and are thought to signal hunger to the brain to let us know that we should stop eating or we might be getting full. Even though it's not pictured here in the image, I also want to talk about glucagon-like peptide or GLP-1. This is a hormone that helps determine when someone feels full. GLP is released by the gut after eating. It helps the body produce insulin and regulates blood glucose levels. A recent class of medications called GLP-1 agonists are a class of drugs that help treat type 2 diabetes and obesity. Maybe you know someone taking a GLP-1 or you've considered taking it yourself or are taking it yourself. These medications mimic the actions of GLP-1 hormone. The drugs include semiglutide, otherwise known as a Zempic, Victosa, Rivalsis, Zepbound, and Wigovi, among others. People taking these medications report decreased appetite and oftentimes a disinterest in eating, which is new to them and has its own set of complications or considerations. But when it comes to regulating appetite hormones, it's been the most effective class of drugs to really long-term affect a person's appetite. We also have a couple other appetite hormones called cholecystokinin, CCK, which reacts from the amount of fat that you eat, and peptide YY or PYY, which reacts to the proteins that you eat. Often, we know that protein can be advantageous for improving appetite regulation as well, with high levels of protein suppressing appetite hormones. We also know that eating a small to moderate amount of fat creates a stronger level of fullness or an increased satiety with meals. There are other hormones that aren't appetite hormones, but are endocrine hormones that have effects on appetite as well. I mentioned on the last slide the interaction between GLP-1 and insulin. Insulin can have both an increase and decreased effect on appetite, depending on how it's released and where it's acting in the body. Insulin releases from endogenous stores, endogenous just meaning inside the body, and that type is associated with fullness. Its job is to help clear the glucose that has been consumed in the meal through the carbohydrate foods that we eat. They get digested, and then that glucose gets absorbed into the blood. High blood glucose is dangerous, as it causes a thickening of the blood. The blood does not flow through capillaries easily, and therefore you have damage to the kidneys, the eyes, the nerves in the feet, and other organ systems. Insulin is really important for regulation of blood glucose. That's why some individuals have to take exogenous sources of insulin. Insulin that comes from exogenous or outside sources, such as in the form of medication, and increase appetite. Estrogen is another hormone that affects appetite. It reduces food intake in humans as well as animals. During menstrual cycles, women tend to eat at the least when estrogen levels are the highest. Usually, this occurs sometime around ovulation. Estrogen may also suppress ghrelin and increase CCK, assisting with appetite regulation. Women are producing estrogen a majority of their life up until the point of menopause, when estrogen levels have dropped so much that we see major life changes, including a shift in how women carry weight. Women who are premenopausal or in menopause tend to have a shift of body fat to the central region of the body, away from the thighs and hips. This also comes with increased risk of chronic diseases. Estrogen has a protective effect on appetite regulation. Another really popular hormone to talk about when it comes to weight is cortisol. Although, the science really has mixed results and some of the associations or mechanisms for how cortisol increases weight are not always seen in the literature. What that mechanism is, though, is that cortisol is elevated during times when we have sleep deprivation. That cortisol is a stress hormone associated with fight or flight, or if you look at it over the chronic or long term, it is a stress hormone that causes a small amount of inflammation in the body. Your body is just reacting to the fact that you're sleep deprived. It's realizing that you might be more groggy or fatigued and releasing more cortisol may stimulate the body to keep you more alert. Why is this a problem? Well, in some studies, cortisol has been shown to increase appetite, especially for fat, sweet and salty foods. So not only does it make us want to eat more, but it also makes us want to eat different types of foods that are associated with higher energy density. This cortisol may also slow down metabolism and cause insulin resistance. High levels of cortisol cause decreases in testosterone, which can also lead to a decrease in muscle mass and may also cause your body to store fat as you cope with stress. So there's a lot of different mechanisms at play with cortisol, some of which may be present in many people and others that might be more dependent upon like a person's genetics or a person's gut microbiome or some kind of interaction that we don't yet clearly understand. So how does sleep deprivation affect appetite hormones? We've talked about some of these associations already, but I want to point out that people who don't get enough sleep may have a less healthy diet overall and may crave energy dense foods. And maybe you can relate to this. Maybe you see changes in what you like to eat on days in which you feel sleep deprived. It may also impact your motivation to make foods or to make healthier types of foods. And sometimes during sleep deprivation, we just take an easy way out and eat out or order out, which also changes the energy density of foods typically. In a study published in 2023, scientists looked at the effect of acute total sleep deprivation on appetite hormones. Participants were about 25 years old. They're both men and women. And the study used a crossover design in which they looked at appetite hormones in the blood after one night of sleep deprivation and one night of normal rest in a laboratory. Note here that there was never a night when participants were sleeping at their home as they usually would. But after sleep deprivation, fasting levels of leptin were lower and graylin was higher. The changes in leptin following sleep loss were more pronounced among women and stronger among those with obesity. So these results remain true over extended periods of sleep loss, weight gain would easily take place, especially in women. We don't have a study that shows us how these levels might continue to be changed with sleep deprivation for longer than a couple of days. However, the mechanism is clear. So sleep and dietary intake or quality are definitely interrelated. The quality and timing of dietary intake at night may delay or shorten sleep duration. This is particularly true in studies of adolescents where this delayed sleep may influence breakfast timing and quality and skipping breakfast is associated with lower dietary quality in adolescents. In other words, they're staying up late and therefore wanting to sleep in. And if they don't sleep in, they're getting a short sleep cycle. If they do sleep in, they run out of time to have a nutritious breakfast. Another thing to consider here with sleep deprivation is the food cravings. Food cravings are just an intense desire to consume a particular food item that have been demonstrated as an important predictor for weight gain in adults. Cravings may be impacted by sleep and in turn influence dietary intake and dietary quality. In a recent experimental study of adults, less sleep was related to taste and wanting for high fat and sweet foods. Age is an important factor when considering cravings as cross-sectional evidence in young adolescents and adults ages 6 to 23 years found that with increasing age, there are less frequent food cravings. Overall, regardless of age, the less sleep, the more sugar and lower fiber and fruits and vegetables in the diet. Multiple randomized controlled trials have investigated the impact of short-term sleep restriction on energy intake and show short sleep duration of four to five hours results in increased energy intake of about 385 calories per day. Often these studies are done in a lab and not necessarily on free living humans. There is a strength to that and that everything else is controlled for all the different environmental factors that could be influencing that calorie increase are controlled for. But it's always interesting to note, right, that there are issues with generalizing findings to free living humans when we haven't necessarily studied them and their full element. So sleep is important for weight loss. Sleep timing is emerging as a key predictor of risk of morbidity and with later bedtimes and greater variability in sleep midpoint and irregular sleep durations, all of these things have been linked with increased biomarkers of cardiometabolic disease risk and adiposity. Sleep extension interventions and short sleepers may help reduce intake of sugars and overall energy intake. And we also know that poor sleep quality, night shift work patterns and social jet lag are associated with lower diet quality. I think the shift workers are particularly vulnerable to short sleep or disrupted sleep. The chronic disruption to the physiological body clock or circadian rhythms in addition to shorter sleep duration and poor sleep quality can be linked to higher energy intakes in this particular population. Social jet lag is a less severe form of chronic disruption. It manifests as an earlier sleep midpoint during working days compared with free days, which are usually the weekends. In other words, people don't sleep a lot during the work week or they do sleep a lot during the work week and then they don't on the weekend. It is also important to consider sleep quality with social jet lag, a term that encompasses frequency of awakenings, time taken to get to sleep and time spent awake as a proportion of time spent in bed, which is called sleep efficiency. Sleep is essential for regulating hormones that control hunger and appetite. But I also wanted to mention that it also maintains homeostasis of regions in the brain associated with rewards. So studies have shown that people who get enough sleep have a lower risk of obesity and are more likely to lose weight successfully. So this evidence would suggest that adding sleep advice into weight management interventions may be more effective than energy restricted diets. What if we had weight management interventions that focused so much more on sleep and sleep hygiene and improving sleep quality and talked less about the need to decrease our diet by 300 or 400 or 500 or 1000 calories a day? So we had a whole lecture from Dr. Swain on how exercise can lead to better sleep. But let's talk about it from the nutrition point of view. One key element is to not go to bed hungry. You also don't want to go to bed on a really full stomach, but avoiding going to bed hungry is known to get a better night's sleep. When you're hungry, the body can't focus on relaxing and the instincts to want to feed the body kick in and override those sleep signals. You want to avoid or limit caffeine, nicotine and alcohol within four to six hours of bedtime. Caffeine consumed even six hours before bed can make it difficult to fall asleep because it blocks the hormone adenosine, which promotes sleepiness. And alcohol disrupts sleep quality. Although the sedative effects of alcohol can initially make it easier to fall asleep, it disrupts sleep patterns by shortening the amount of REM or rapid eye movement, which is sleep in the first part of the night and leads to more night awakenings. This graphic from the National Sleep Foundation helps us answer that question of, hmm, will a small amount of alcohol affect my sleep? How much alcohol you drink and when you drink it can both influence sleep. As you consume alcohol, it's rapidly absorbed into your bloodstream where it remains until your liver is able to metabolize it, typically at the rate of about one drink per hour. If you have alcohol in your bloodstream when you go to sleep, you are likely to experience alterations in sleep architecture, or that is how your body cycles through the four stages of sleep. The typical sleep cycle begins with three non-rapid eye movement stages of sleep and ends with rapid eye movement, or REM, during the fourth stage. During sleep, the body cycles through all of these stages every 90 to 120 minutes, with the non-REM sleep dominating the first part of the night and REM increasing during the second part of the night. Each stage is necessary for sleep to feel refreshing and for vital processes like learning and memory consolidation to occur. So when you go to bed with alcohol in your system, you're likely to experience more non-REM sleep and less REM sleep than usual, at least initially. Later in the night, once your body has metabolized the alcohol, you're likely to experience a rise in the REM sleep, the lightest, or sorry, you're likely to experience a rise in the lightest stage of sleep. And this can lead to frequent wakings and fragmented low quality sleep. And as you can see from this graphic, even low amounts of alcohol decrease sleep quality, and that increases as the number of drinks go up. We also know from a small amount of research that saturated fats, the kind that come from burgers and fried foods, may lead to less slow-wave sleep. And we really want that slow-wave sleep. That's our quality sleep. So let's think about how we can use foods that promote sleep as part of our sleep regimen. Researchers at the University of Michigan, sorry y'all, have followed more than a thousand young adults ages 21 to 30 who were enrolled in a web-based dietary intervention study designed to help them increase fruits and vegetables. In that study, they found that those who increased their fruit and vegetable consumption over a three month period reported better sleep quality and reductions in insomnia symptoms. Overall diet quality matters, but let's focus in on some specifics here. Dairy foods, tart cherries, and berries contain melatonin, and melatonin is sleep-supporting. It's a hormone that we need to in order to have, in order to get to sleep and promote better sleep quality. Tart cherry juice in particular, which is if you get the 100% fruit juice of the juice of the sour cherries, can reduce muscle soreness and boost your immune system, and it may also help you sleep better. Eating about 8 ounces one hour before bed seems to provide the benefit that you might be looking for. There are also capsules, which can be riskier because they're a dietary supplement and they're often unregulated. If you want to consider taking a dietary supplement instead of using the whole food source, talk to your dietitian. Poor rich foods also trigger the release of an important hormone of serotonin, so that can help with sleep. And protein rich foods contain high levels of tryptophan, which eventually trigger a turn in, you know, help with the production of melatonin. Potassium and magnesium you can also do as supplements, but are safer to get from food sources. These foods help the muscles relax. Electrolyte drinks and supplements have their place, but the food you eat should be the foundation, in part because it's hard to overdo any single nutrient and food form. Foods rarely contain toxic doses of vitamins and minerals, and you don't have to worry about balancing out your electrolytes when you're eating foods. You can chomp away on electrolyte rich foods without fear and using bananas, avocados, potatoes, pumpkin seeds, sweet potatoes, yogurt, and dark leafy greens are all good choices for increasing potassium and magnesium in your diet. There's also been research to show that herbal teas like chamomile and mint are considered sleep inducing. So here are some examples of some late night snacks that will help promote sleep. On the left, we have yogurt with the tart cherries and a sprinkling of pumpkin seeds on top. This provides the production of melatonin, right, that is supportive of sleep. In the middle, we have roasted chickpeas, which you can flavor with a variety of different spices or seasonings. Toss a can, empty a can out, rinse them, pat them dry, season them, and then put them in the air fryer for just a short period of time. They toast up nice and crispy. Chickpeas contain both protein and fiber, which we know to be supportive of sleep. And on the right hand side, we have our potassium and magnesium rich banana with some magnesium rich almond butter on top. Here's to many, many future nights of excellent sleep.
 Welcome to your weekly wrap up everyone. Let's wrap up our discussion of sleep by going over some tips to improve your sleep and how to feel rested when you wake up. First off, as we have already talked about this week, it is important, imperative to create a sleep schedule. During the weekdays, you should try to go to bed and wake up around the same time each day. This practice allows your body to adapt to your routine and to create a natural sleep and wake cycle. This will help to make you fall asleep quickly and wake up more rested after doing this practice regularly. Next, be aware of your exposure to light before you fall asleep. Light plays a central role in regulating circadian rhythm, the body's internal clock that signals when to be alert and when to rest. Light also affects the production of melatonin, an essential sleep promoting hormone. Studies have shown that blue light triggers your mind to be more awake and alert. So consider switching your phone or laptop to night mode to reduce your exposure to blue light. Also, make sure your sleeping environment is dark when you fall asleep. Try not to leave the TV on or have other sources of light present when it is time for bed. If you don't have control over the shades or stickers to keep out light, use a sleep mask. Use a dim, warm colored nightlight in areas that you may need to traverse, like the bathroom. It's also important to be aware of what you eat before you sleep. Substances like sugar and caffeine can make you restless when you're trying to fall asleep. Also, you should try not to go to sleep hungry or too full. It is best to eat a full meal several hours before going to bed to avoid snacking and also to achieve the best sleep. If you are having trouble getting enough sleep at night, or you do not feel rested when you wake up in the morning, we encourage you to try following these tips. As you have learned this week, sleep and recovery is crucial to your overall health and performance while you are awake. So pay attention to your sleep habits and make a change for the better.
