 Hello everyone and welcome back to class where we examine food as function and movement as medicine. This week's lesson is all about medical costs. We will examine the statistics behind medical bills in the United States. We will examine the importance of staying healthy through powerful lifestyle medicines so you can avoid high doctor bills that come as a result of a sedentary lifestyle. As many of you may be aware, medical bills can get extremely expensive and have a huge impact on your financial wellness and budgeting. But just how expensive are we talking about Julie? 4.5 trillion dollars expensive Carmen. That's right in 2022 the US accumulated about 4.5 trillion dollars in total medical expenses which is way higher than any other country in the world today. That's thirteen thousand four hundred ninety three dollars per person which is more than double the average of other wealthy nations. This was a 4.1 percent increase from the previous year and accounted for about seventeen percent of our country's gross domestic product. Wow that is really expensive. Of course we know some medical expenses are from unavoidable conditions or injuries but let us recognize that a huge percentage of these costs are mostly related to preventable illnesses and disease. Make sure you watch the lectures this week to learn how proper nutrition and exercise can help minimize health care costs by preventing chronic conditions. We'll also talk about how to save money on food while eating more according to the dietary guidelines for Americans.
 Welcome to week six, where we'll talk about food on a healthy budget. Is it true that healthy foods cost more? Sometimes. Compare this apple, which we know to be rich in fiber, quercetin, vitamin C, and other nutrients, and it might cost anywhere between 45 cents and $1.29. If you're buying organic, it's probably closer to $1.59 each. And then we have on the right-hand side, a 30-pack of snacks. These snacks probably contain some B vitamins and about double the amount of calories as the apple. If we're lucky, we can find these on sale for about 43 cents a pack. So comparing the cost of these two items, that pack of sugary snack might cost half as much as the apple. We'll take another example, comparing fast food hamburger meal with French fries and a soda, like to a healthier option at perhaps a sit-down restaurant. This one in particular reminds me of Northstar and their veggie burger. That burger's going to be rich in fruits, vegetables, fiber, all kinds of nutrients, making it a much healthier choice than the fast food option. But it's probably also going to be a good $8 or $9 more expensive. Eating out can be cheaper than eating at home, but eating out can also be a lot more expensive. So strategies for lowering food costs are going to be eating at home, but we'll also talk about how to lower those food costs when you are eating out as well. We'll talk about making a plan, shopping smart and reducing food wastes. What does the research say about how expensive a home cooked meal is versus eating out? We see here that the most recent suggestion is that the average home cooked meal is about $4.23 versus $16 for eating out. The exact cost really depends on a variety of factors, including a person's lifestyle and their food choices. It may also depend on which meal you're eating out, as sometimes breakfast can be cheaper option compared to lunch and dinner. When making meals at home, that average cost probably depends on how smart you're shopping and whether or not you're choosing proteins that are affordable compared to those that can get quite expensive. But overall, eating out can cost over $13,000 more per year compared to cooking at home. So maybe this is a good incentive in addition to the fact that eating at home is often more nutritious, less high in sodium, less high in fat and less high in added sugars. Some pro tips for getting started with eating and drinking at home would be to just start somewhere and start simple. You can think about replacing one meal out with one at home each week. Maybe there's a meal that's particularly expensive for you, but it just happens to be very convenient and often feels like a reward. Maybe start there with how you can make a change so that you can replicate that meal at home or perhaps replicate it with a meal that you find equally satisfying. Another tip is to brew coffee or tea at home. With the cost of coffee and coffee shops continuing to go up, right? Switch out that specialty beverage or brew for a nice home brewed version. And if you're lucky, you can ask for a coffee maker or an espresso maker, something that suits your needs. You can also use coffee as a gift to make this even easier. Another idea is to invite friends to eat with you. Sometimes it's not very fun to cook for one person. Sometimes it's challenging to do just that. So invite your friends over to eat with you or maybe start a dinner club or a meal club where you rotate houses or rotate who's in charge of making that meal. Finally, drinking water instead of soda or juices is another great way to save on costs. Sure, you might have more of an investment upfront if you're purchasing a water bottle or two or three, but overall you will end up saving money. And typically those sodas and juices are not offering a lot of nutrition, but mostly just calories or empty fluid. Now, if you do find yourself eating out, because we all do, every once in a while, think about how to save money. One good way to do that is to skip the drinks, which are often marked up significantly at restaurants. Also skip dessert, as many high volume restaurants outsource their desserts. So it's something that you could buy at the store just like they do. Also skipping dessert may help you save on calories, empty calories or excess calories that you're really not even hungry for. And maybe switching that out for having an Oreo or a small cookie or a small piece of chocolate at home would be a much better way of finishing off the night. Think about sharing a meal, as oftentimes restaurant servings are quite large. Sharing a meal can also be kind of fun and you could even share a meal and an appetizer and therefore having a couple of different dishes and maintaining that variety that you might like when you eat out. You could go to happy hour and use the happy hour prices to help with discounted foods and drinks. And lastly, order an appetizer as your meal, right? Maybe there's something that you really wanna try and likely in some cases, because of the size of the appetizer, you may not even be hungry by the time that you get to your actual meal. After you figure out how you're going to eat at home, wanna think about making a plan. Choose one time a week to meal plan. Maybe this is on Sunday night when you're watching a little bit of TV and catching up with friends. Maybe it's more like a Monday night or a Wednesday night in the middle of the week, knowing that you're gonna grocery shop in a couple of days. Whatever that time is for you, right? Make it a routine and something that you carve out to do on a regular basis. You don't have to plan everything out for the week. That could get overwhelming. What you wanna do is start by just planning out one or two, maybe three at the most larger meals to cook each week and then get as much done on the weekends as possible with some meal prep. See what you already have. What's in your cupboards? What's in your freezer? What's in the refrigerator? And what can you use in your meal plan this week? Then write out your meal plan. Now you might wanna do this on paper, in a journal, or maybe on your phone, which will help you. There's some ways in which they can help you create a list. Maybe you write it on the refrigerator and keep a list going there. And when the mood strikes you, you write down some new ideas. Wherever it is, again, make it a habit, designate a spot and write out your meal plan. After you make that meal plan, you'll be able to make a grocery list with all of the items that you need in order to make those meals. There's definitely some good ways to go about doing this. And again, I like to keep it simple. Finding recipes that have a long list of ingredients that you may or may not have is frustrating and it makes it overwhelming. So look for recipes with five ingredients or less. If you find a recipe that you really wanna try and it has more than five ingredients, then maybe look to see which ingredients you can leave out. Not all the herbs and spices are always needed. Also choose recipes that take 20 minutes or less prep time. I like to find recipes that have 10 minutes or less prep time. The prep time is really the amount of time that you're gonna spend in the kitchen working on it. It doesn't include like the baking time or the cooking time, which is really time that you can spend doing other things. So 20 minutes or less is a good starting point. You will get more efficient with your time the more that you cook and build your skills, maybe even take a couple of classes on YouTube on how to do knife cuts. And you can invite friends to do this together so that meal prepping becomes a fun activity, something social. Choose a time to make these meals when you have the most time. Figuring out again, when is that for you? When won't you be stressed about turning in homework or getting an assignment done? Use that time then whatever it is that you have. If you designate that you have 20 minutes to meal prep or make a meal, great. If you have 30, use 30. If you have 60 minutes at a time, maybe there's some extra things you can get done to help you prep for breakfast and lunches in the coming week. In addition to those couple of dinner meals that you have slated from your meal plan. I thought I'd share with you some of the resources that college students and others often find helpful or exciting. One of those is a website called Budget Bytes. I really like this because it is simple. Like we said, recipes with few ingredients, pretty short prep times, depending on the recipe that you choose. And I like that they give you the cost per serving. So you can really determine if it's going to fit in your food budget for the week. And includes all kinds of foods. You see here on the webpage right now, they're featuring an in season type of cookie, as well as more of a dinner recipe, as well as like a side dish or like a accoutrement, like a topping that you might use on top of vegetable or meat dish. So check out Budget Bytes and see what you think. They have a lot of great tabs that can help you with a variety of different aspects when you're planning your meals. Another idea is to make a simple list yourself of the foods that you like across categories. When we're talking about making a meal, we want to think about including at least three different types of foods from three different food groups. I like to make a sheet where I'm just listing out a bunch of proteins, followed by a bunch of grains, followed by a bunch of vegetables. If we use that like my plate scenario, about half my plate's going to become the vegetable, a quarter of it's going to be the grain, and a quarter of it's going to be the protein. And by making a list like this of all the different possibilities that either I like or I have on hand, then I can mix and match and get creative with what I make. Or I can just keep it really simple. I also like to choose proteins that are quick. They cook quickly or they take very little prep time. So those are things like shrimp, pork loin that you just have to take out of the bag and put in the oven, salmon that I can place on a sheet with some vegetables and therefore it gets made all at the same time. Sometimes I like to do refried beans, which don't really even involve any cooking at all. So it's good to have these options there, especially when you have a busy week. Those grain items are going to be a mix of whole grains and refined grains. Some of the grains are really vegetables like mashed potatoes and that's okay. Mashed potatoes are in tater tots or are a starchy type of vegetable, often with the nutrient composition of other grains. And finally, those vegetables, I can either do raw or cooked. And I can think about different ways of making them either from a frozen bag or from a raw state, maybe roasted in the oven. I like to think here too about using a lot of different colored vegetables. Remember that every different color of vegetable is going to provide a different set of nutrients and antioxidants. So when you're planning your meals, kind of think through the different colors and what you want to see represented on that week. And I have a little note at the bottom for me or for my family to add in to say, hey, I got an idea for next week, let's try this. I'll also feature one app in particular. With the caveat of saying that there are actually quite a few of these types of apps that will not only help you meal plan, but they'll help you select your favorite recipes, create and create your grocery lists. It's kind of like a one size or one stop fits all. You can sync it with your different devices. I believe you can share it out with friends and family and get ideas from them as well. So when you have a recipe that you like, you save it to the app. It helps generate a grocery list from the recipe. And then it helps you figure out when to make that meal or how to slate it into your overall meal plan based on your calendar. There might be a little bit of a cost involved with some of these apps, but I do feel like it's worth it, especially with the money that you're saving, cooking at home versus eating out. Once you have that meal plan together, you're really gonna focus on shopping smart. What do we mean by that? That means this is where the rubber hits the road. This is where you're gonna go to the grocery store and use the budget that you have to buy the supplies that you need for as long as possible. One of the best ways to do this is to buy a mix of shelf stable, frozen and perishable items. That way, you don't have to rely on just having fresh, which eventually is gonna go bad. Like those bananas, there is only gonna be a couple days in that window that you're really gonna like the texture and consistency of that banana. All the other days, it's gonna be too raw or too ripe. That can happen to a variety of different fruits and vegetables. So it can be good to stock up on frozen forms of fruits and vegetables as well as canned forms of fruits and vegetables. When you're looking for those frozen and canned options, look for the options in which it's pretty much just the fruit or vegetable itself. Added sauces can really add flavor, but they can also add quite a bit of fat too. So just look at the label and determine if that's something that's fitting into your goals for the day. With the fruit, oftentimes it's canned in either a heavy syrup or a light syrup or in its own juices. Look for those that are canned in their own juices. That has the least amount of extra sugars or added sugars. Frozen, fresh, canned fruits and vegetables are all nutritious. So there's no reason to feel like you shouldn't have one form of them just because it's not fresh. Oftentimes these days the processes used to freeze and to can are just as good as retaining nutrients compared to that fresh version that may have traveled thousands of miles to get to the grocery store to sit for quite some time. Anytime that fruits and vegetables are exposed to light and air, they're gonna lose nutrients. So frozen and canned options, we don't have to feel bad about. Use them, shop smart. Another idea is to make sure that you're buying in season produce. When it's in season, it means cheaper. I'll show you some ideas in order to identify when fruits and vegetables are in fact in season. Also finding whole grains that are cheap is a good important tip. There's lots of options here. Brown rice, whole grain pasta, quinoa, whole wheat bread, oats and oatmeal, as well as cornmeal are all very affordable and there's a whole grain options to put into the mix. This is a site from USDA that I really like. It helps us see which are the fruits and vegetables that are the most affordable. And it's pretty interactive. So this is just a partial viewing of what it will do. But it allows the user to select specific fruits or vegetables in the desired form, such as fresh. And then two drop down menus control the output displayed. If a user selects vegetables rather than fruits, and then they can select something like sweet corn from the upper drop down menu as the type of vegetable. And you can also set the lower drop down menu in the form of that vegetable that you want to have, canned, fresh or frozen will all be displayed. So it really gives you a sense of how to compare across fruits, but also comparing in the form that makes the most sense. In this case, the fruit that was chosen looks like it's apricots, apples, grapes, watermelon, and it's comparing some of the prices of those fruits across canned, dried, fresh and juice. Right away we noticed some trends that those fresh options really vary all the way from 0.24 or 0.24 cents per serving of watermelon up to apricots, fresh apricots that are $1.41 per serving. This tells us that there are definitely some fruits and vegetables that are a lot more affordable than others regardless of what season we're in. Often those are things that are a little bit larger in size, like watermelon, cantaloupe, honeydew, pineapple. But this chart will help you determine lots of other ideas. We can also see that fresh isn't always the most expensive. Sometimes canned is the most expensive. And on here we do not see represented frozen fruit, which is also a good option in some cases. There's another listing that you could reference. I put the website here. It comes from a site called How to Cook. And it has an ultimate fruit and veggie price chart. This price chart is much too big to include on a single PowerPoint slide. It has like at least 50 different fruits and vegetables at all different price points. I started off with the lowest price points. Again, these are set up so that they are comparing fruits and vegetables in terms of a serving size or how much you would typically eat. And you'll see that pinto beans, right, or the cheapest dried pinto beans, are the cheapest form of vegetables on this list. But there are a couple things here that might really surprise you, such as seeing fresh potatoes that are very affordable at 20 cents a serving. You see that watermelon again, followed by a lot of beans and lentils. Carrots, whole raw fresh carrots also show up at 24 cents per serving, as well as apple juice from concentrate. So I have a couple of slides here that allows you to kind of see the progression as the fruits and vegetables get more expensive. But I noticed that there are still a lot of really good options, bananas, cucumbers, lettuce, green beans, right? These are all foods that are quite affordable. The USDA also has a site that allows us to see what seasonal or in season produce is. And you can't tell here, but if you were to go to this site and click on something in particular, like carrots, it would tell you a lot more about carrots, how to fix carrots, how to prepare carrots, some fun recipes that you'll find carrots in. So if you go to this USDA seasonal produce guide, I just selected the one for fall. Maybe there's fruits and vegetables here that you have no idea what to do with. And that's part of the fun. Selecting something, learning a little bit more about it, and perhaps giving it a try when it is in season, that means most tasty and most affordable. A lot of people these days are focused on protein and making sure that they get enough protein in their diet. In fact, a lot of people are shooting for like, really high protein diet. So what do we do about that? How do we eat proteins on a budget? Some low cost protein foods include beans, peas, and lentils, such as kidney beans, split peas, and garbanzo beans or chickpeas. These can come in a dried form, or my preferred source is a canned form. In the canned form, they're already cooked and ready to go. I'm basically just opening up that can, rinsing it out, rinsing it off, and using the beans or lentils that are in there. Beans, peas, and lentils cost less than similar amounts of other protein foods. So you get a lot of bang for your buck. And those beans and peas also count as vegetables. So you're getting your protein and your vegetables on a single food. However, for people who like to eat meat or enjoy meat, you can lower meat costs by buying the family size or the value pack and freezing what you don't use. Meat tends to freeze pretty well, all forms of it. So even if you buy it fresh, you can put it in the freezer until you need it later. You can also use that same approach that we saw with fruits and vegetables to buy canned tuna or salmon, which is often the cheapest form in which those fish come. It's also really convenient. Not canned, maybe you buy it in a tuna pack. And if you're buying it fresh, look for the form that is the least, you know, has the most affordable. Oftentimes that will be like a farmed version of salmon versus a wild form of salmon. Farmed salmon and wild salmon have their advantages and disadvantages. That farm-raised salmon may not be as rich in omega-3s as the wild-caught salmon, but the farm-raised salmon may also be lower in PCBs or other toxins. So they have their trade-offs and it's okay to kind of mix and match and have farmed fish or farmed salmon every once in a while. Choose those lean meats like chicken or turkey or even ground beef. Just make sure it's lean, at least 93% lean ground beef. And don't forget about eggs and dairy and dairy alternatives, which are a great low-cost option that are easy to make. And what about that good old peanut butter and jelly sandwich, right? Peanut butter is an affordable protein. It's also versatile, right? You can put it on a sandwich, but you can also put it in peanut butter or on top of pancakes and use it to really help boost the protein content of your bread. In addition to snacks, who doesn't like this time of year an apple with some peanut butter on it? The last idea about food on a healthy budget is to try to reduce food waste by planning to use leftovers, freezing items when you have too much of them or they're about to go to waste, or adopt an additional food waste. Planning for leftovers can seem a little daunting at first, especially if you're a person who doesn't like leftovers. What do you do then? Well, leftovers don't have to taste terrible. You can often use a protein such as chicken to become chicken salad or chicken quesadillas or throw it into a soup. You can use leftover vegetables as well. Where you might have integrated it into one dish the night before and are now making something else out of it. You can use artificial intelligence to come up with all kinds of ideas for ways to plan and use leftovers. Another idea here is to freeze it. A lot of times we have too much, we accidentally bought too much of the fresh option, and now we need to freeze it. I think about this when I think about those bananas, right? When they're past the state at which I would ever eat one fresh, I can throw it in the freezer and eventually make some ice cream or some muffins or some banana bread out of it later. You can use this same technique with things like sweet potatoes. So if you have too many of them, you can mash them up and you can use them to make a little bit of a mess. There's lots of tricks to learn here. Again, the more you kind of look, open your mind up to how to use fresh potatoes and how to use them in the freezer. I'm going to show you a couple of tips to use when you're cooking. So first of all, you need to use your hands. You need to use your hands to help you get to where you want to go. You want to use your hands to help you get to where you want to go. You want to use your hands to help you get to where you want to go. Open your mind up to how to use freezing it or how to save on reducing food waste, the easier that it gets. Using that use it up mentality, right, can be a fun way to gather all the ingredients at risk of being wasted and get creative. Hulinary creative. Almost anything can be tossed into soups, stir fries, tacos and salads. I hope you enjoyed this presentation and as you're thinking about different ways in which you can bring your food costs down. Enjoy.
 Welcome back to the weekly wrap-up. In this week's lecture, you learned about how exercise and diet can fit within your personal budget, as well as how proper lifestyle habits can decrease your overall medical costs. Let's wrap up this unit by identifying how making good choices prevents unnecessary treatment and medical costs. One fact that we stressed this week is that exercise and nutrition can be used to prevent the development of chronic diseases. In 2021, people with large employer private insurance coverage who had obesity or overweight diagnosed and diagnosis averaged $8,000 more dollars in health care spending compared to those with no obesity or overweight diagnosis on their health insurance claims. The comparisons between someone with and without diabetes are even more pronounced. These costs add up over time. Additionally, obesity may cause many long-term health issues. Conditions that are associated with obesity include hypertension, heart disease, and an increased risk of stroke, which can lead to even higher medical costs down the road. Many of the costs associated with obesity can effectively be prevented or treated by using exercise and diet as an intervention. Even when weight is not reduced, eating more fruits and vegetables and getting fit can protect a person from high cholesterol, high blood pressure, and other important biomarkers. The most important nutrients for weight loss are eating more fiber, protein, and fluids, a nutritious diet that will fill you up without ingesting too many calories to prevent weight gain. One way this could be done is by eating more whole foods and less fast foods. Processed or fast food contains preservatives and unhealthy ingredients that are highly caloric and lack nutrient density. But fresh foods such as fruits and vegetables contain vitamins and fiber which will fill you up quicker and keep you fuller for longer. We've been building on a theme in this course. The foods that are higher quality in nature with high nutrient density and phytochemicals serve as valuable building blocks to build a healthier you and also fight off any other foods. Another positive choice that you can make to prevent additional medical costs is by doing resistance training and stretching to both strengthen your muscles and promote better posture and stability. In our busy modern society, we are often sitting down, sitting down to work or to study for long long periods of time. Sometimes the entire day. During time spent seated, we are typically hunched over a computer or a device which causes poor posture and if not combated through strengthening exercise, our posture will continue to degrade over time due to the lack of strength in our stabilizers. And this condition often leads to back and neck pain which is a very common issue today. And we often see those with this condition treated in physical therapy and even interventions such as surgery. But guess what? This problem can be prevented by doing proper exercise and stretching to strengthen both the neck and back muscles to improve your stabilization and decrease back pain. As we wrap up think about the key takeaways from this week. What are some other ways that creating healthy lifestyle habits can help you avoid future medical treatment and save money? What are some other ways that you can help your family and friends? What are some other ways that creating healthy lifestyle habits can help you avoid future medical treatment and save money? And how could you use this information in your life?

