 Hello everyone and welcome back to Food is Function, Movement is Medicine. This week we are going to dive into the concept of weight loss, including the physiology behind burning carbs and fats and discussing how effectively to lose weight. Thousands of people each year in the United States set a goal to lose weight. But as you might imagine, many individuals fail to construct an effective plan to do so. This is partially due to the amount of misleading information that people are told about weight loss. So today we are going to talk about some of the most common weight loss myths. What I often hear is that you must avoid fatty foods to lose weight. This is not exactly true. Fats are more caloric than carbohydrates, which means that they have the potential to accumulate and cause weight gain. But they are also still quite important for your body and supply nutrients as well. In fact, many diets rely on consuming fats for energy instead of eating other foods. So instead of taking fats out of your diet completely, you should try to focus on consuming healthy fats in your diet and decreasing unhealthy fats like trans fat and saturated fats. A good place to start is to reduce the amount of processed foods that we eat. These are often laden with unhealthy fats and processed carbohydrates. Instead focus on the fruits, veggies, whole grains, dairy, and lean proteins. Another strategy that I've seen people try to use is by greatly driving up the number or duration of workouts or by not eating at all, all in an effort to lose weight. And while these efforts may be successful in the short term, unfortunately the pounds lost in this way are almost entirely due to water loss. And not only are these strategies not sustainable, but is also not what the science shows is the most effective strategy for successful weight loss. This week we have a third lecture from Nancy Siegel, a graduate student in the Master's in Dietetics and Nutrition program. Nancy recently finished a rotation at Ohio State Comprehensive Weight Management Center that addresses weight loss through lifestyle interventions like diet and exercise, as well as medications and bariatric surgeries. She talks about the recent emergence of a new class of weight loss medications that have become extremely popular, GLP-1s. Make sure you watch this week's lecture videos to discover what the science has to show regarding how to effectively lose weight with proper nutrition and exercise.
