 All right, everybody, my name is Nancy and I am a graduate teaching assistant for this course. I'm super excited to bring this mini lecture on weight loss medications to you as it is super popular in the media today. So what are they? They're prescription medications that are administered orally or subcutaneously. This just means by mouth or by injection and that injection site is typically around the abdomen and you're also going to be referred or seeing them referred to as anti-obesity medications which most likely is going to be in research studies. So we know that they help patients with overweight and obesity achieve weight loss. They reduce weight regain and they decrease risk of obesity related comorbidities. And so these comorbidities are things such as type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, dyslipidemia or sleep apnea. And so what are the prescription rules? Providers typically provide at their own discretion. Typically though we're seeing that they're for patients with a BMI of 30 or greater, a BMI of 27 or greater with a comorbidity of type 2 diabetes, hypertension, stuff that we talked about in that first slide or a failed attempt at a lifestyle change. So you can see how this with providers prescribing at their discretion, it's very unique on a patient to patient basis. And so also that's going to indicate the type of relationship a patient has with their provider, maybe the easier route or how difficult it is to be prescribed one of these medications. Another thing I want you to think about is the BMI classifications, right? So we've learned that BMI is a calculation that does not involve the consideration of muscle mass or lean body mass. And so thinking about how that 27 is in the overweight category over here, populations such as athletes typically are considered overweight or potentially even obese, just the amount of muscle mass that they have on their bodies. And so this is just a rare area of discussion. I'm just opening up for just questions that we even ask ourselves as, will this kind of indicate maybe not the right people being prescribed these medications or should we move to some other qualifications rather than this BMI calculation for the prescription rules? But anyway, it's just a thought. So the mechanism, glucagon-like peptide one or GLP-1 receptor agonist are what we know is in the medication that is what's causing this weight loss phenomenon. And so it's a hormone that's produced in the gut or the intestines and it is responsible for regulating appetite in this sense. And so historically these have been used for management of type 2 diabetes because they help us relate blood sugar as well or blood glucose. So you can see here on the right, this is a really good figure where it just shows us clearly kind of the mechanism of how this is happening. So the receptor agonist bind to the GLP-1 receptors in the hypothalamus of the brain. And these are going to inhibit those hunger cues like neuropeptide Y and AGRP. And so when these are inhibited, we become less hungry or we have increased satiety. And so that hence happens to have reduced hunger, reduced energy intake and reduced food cravings. So you can see why overall we see weight loss with these medications because we're being less hungry. So this is another figure from a research article that I think really makes it easy for us to understand if we're not too keen on all the nutrition background. And so basically we can see that the hypothalamus is where those receptors lie. And so the receptor agonists are latching on, going to increase our appetite or increase our satiety, decrease our appetite. And what does this do to the stomach? And so this is going to decrease gastric emptying and also decrease gastrointestinal motility. So we can think about that as slowing down digestion time of food, right? So it's going to keep food in our stomachs for longer, which is going to take up more space and then hence tell our brains like, hey, I'm not hungry. I don't have any more space. Don't give me more food right now. And because of this, we're also going to see pancreas having that glucose dependent insulin release. And so insulin is only going to be released when we have higher levels of blood, the blood sugar that needs to be controlled. So we're going to see with this, that's going to kind of drive the weight loss factor because we're constantly having a slower digestion rate, which is constantly having those appetite cues being suppressed. And so the last slide showed some of the brand names, but we're going to get into the brand names here. So currently there are six FDA approved medications for weight loss. And so they can be divided up into here, but we're going to focus on the names in parentheses, or typical brand names you're seeing in the markets. So Zenical is the one unique medication out of all these six because it decreases fat absorption. It does this by inhibiting the release of pancreatic lipases. And so basically what you need to know is that our body's going to absorb less fat from the food we eat, hence contributing to this weight loss factor. Then kiwi's ma and contrary are those ones that are going to decrease appetite and show us early satiety. These first three also are typically pill form, which is just something interesting to note. And then here we come into sexenda and bogovian and ozempic, which I believe ozempic is probably the most popular one people know of, but these are our GLP-1 agonists. They're going to regulate our appetite and then increase the early satiety. And then zep bound and M. curvy do basically the same thing. And so they all have very similar mechanisms of actions, but they do also give very similar symptoms as well. But we can see that those last four are also daily or weekly injections, but those are going to be those ones administered subcutaneously rather than a pill. And so what are the side effects? Thinking about the side effects that come with the medications and also the route of administration is really what's going to help the provider and the healthcare team figure out what medication is probably right for the patient. And so we see nausea, headache, constipation, vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, or stomach discomfort in general. Interesting thing to note is that patients might not see any of these. They might see one. People on the same medications might see totally different symptoms. It's just really on a case by case basis. Sometimes these symptoms can be so jarring that it decreases the quality of life of a patient and they might rather just not rely on weight loss medications and they could go other routes, but it really is very specific to people. So how much weight is lost? We know that on average, greater than or equal to 15% body rate reduction is typically being seen right now. There are smaller reductions. Around 5 to 10% are seen, but typically they're up to 15%. And then if less than 5% after three months of weight loss is seen, then the discontinuation is considered. Or you might switch to different medications. It's really on a case by case basis again. So I actually had the pleasure of being an intern at the weight management clinic here at Martha Morehouse over the summer with a weight management dietitian. And Tuesday through Friday, we got to sit in clinic talking to patients that were prescribed weight loss medications all day. So I really got to get some good experience with stories. And typically if they weren't having success, we would dive into behavior or lifestyle changes that were happening as well, or we would see them cycle through different medications. So it's really interesting. We'll talk about this later. We've seen greater reductions with exercise and lifestyle changes with patients on these medications. So once again, I'm going to talk about some of that real world application I saw at the clinic. We see patients, how do we tell them to fuel with no less or low hunger cues? How do we tell them to obtain adequate protein to prevent this muscle mass loss? And how can we tell them to obtain adequate micronutrients? Small really big questions with somebody who's losing weight pretty rapidly. So let's start with the hunger cues. We can focus on liquid calories, small frequent meals, or setting reminders to eat. Liquid calories are going to be somebody's best friend when they don't really have an appetite. This is something that's pretty convenient to get in. And setting reminders to eat might sound pretty silly to somebody, but it becomes very pertinent and very real when you just really aren't getting those hunger cues. It can be really helpful for somebody to be reminded to eat. So protein, we talk about high quality weight loss. And what that means is we're going to preserve that lean body mass or muscle mass, and we're going to lose the fat mass. So one thing we would talk about is protein at every meal, really getting a good source of protein. But think about how much of that, how many of your daily calories is protein? So we know the AMDR is 10 to 35% of calories per day. But we see these patients on medications reaching the higher limit of that protein per day recommendation. We can also think about that as a 1.5 gram per kilogram per day of body weight, which we know that the RDA is 0.8. So 1.5 is a pretty big jump, but that's because we really want to make sure these patients are keeping that muscle mass and not going into a state of sarcopenia or getting that way. And then obtaining adequate micronutrients. And so you can think about somebody who's reducing caloric intake from what they have eventually done. They're going to be getting less calories, but they're also going to be getting less micronutrients. And so when we talk about a good diet for somebody on a weight loss medication regimen, it's really priding on nutrient density. And so that is optimizing fruit and vegetable intake really simply, but also recommending safe and quality supplementation if that's necessary for somebody as well. And so here's just a real world example. So the company Abbott is now advertising this Protality Shake that is marketed towards patients using GLP-1s because it has an ingredient called HMB. And so if you're familiar with the sports world or sports nutrition, you might have heard of this supplement, right? Hydroxy methyl butyrate. It's shown to help slow muscle breakdown. But one thing that Abbott does really well is coin in the research to their products. And so they're saying that three grams of HMB has been shown to support muscle health. So this would be great for somebody who is on a weight loss medication, right? They want to keep that muscle mass. They want to keep on their lean body mass. So they're saying if they have two of their shakes per day, you can get these benefits. Either way, I like it because it's convenient for somebody with a low appetite, somebody like on these medications, because it's going to be a really easy way to get in those calories. And plus, I like the protein content, the great way to get in protein. And when we talk about vitamins and minerals, these shakes like this normally have added nutrients. So we can see here on the nutrition facts label, we're seeing some vitamin D, calcium, magnesium, all good stuff. So another railroad application, how do you tell somebody to eat with no appetite? So this is a sample day of eating and taking around 35% of protein calories, so 130 grams of protein per day. Taking in this day of eating real quick, we can kind of see that there's a lot of eating occurrences. What you're going to notice is that they're pretty small meals. We got small portions, but high eating occurrences. This is a type of day that is going to work really well for somebody who can only take in a little bit of food each time, do that slow gastric emptying or that food staying in their system for just a bit longer. You can see here that we have two occurrences of the protein drink. That's because this person hypothetically needs to rely on a little bit of extra liquid calories because they just can't stomach food throughout the day. Another really interesting point is that each of these eating occurrences have a good source of protein. If it comes down to it, finishing the protein source each meal first before venturing out into the other ingredients is something also that patients can kind of focus on. So we're always trying to promote that protein, promote that preservation of lean body mass and the loss of the fat mass as we have this high quality weight loss or strive to have the high quality weight loss as we can. So what do we know? We think we know that there needs to be lifetime adherence to these meds. So what we'll say is that research is still being published, still being continuously looked at, but we know that there is weight regain after stopping medication. So that's one thing to keep in note is that weight and the number on the scale is very sensitive to this population and people who are on weight loss medications. It can be very frustrating and it can be a large setback when somebody thinks that they've reached their goal weight, then they discontinue the medications and then they see that weight come right back on. That's something that healthcare team needs to be aware of and watch out for when this process starts to happen. We can also look at the long-term symptoms for specific medications. And so that means, let's say this patient has nausea every single time they administer the medications, but they're rocking with the nausea because they want to see that weight loss and they're having success. It's almost like, how long can somebody have that nausea weekly and still be happy, have a good quality of life with the medication? So that's something to think about. But also for us, there is coined research saying that benefits of physical activity and lifestyle change promote sustained weight loss. So we're seeing greater reductions in body fat and body weight, which is awesome. Research shows that lifestyle and good nutrient density of a diet can really help with physical activity and sustained weight loss. Let's have a full picture to the weight loss medications and really add in that behavior change is really promising. So that's it. I hope you learned something interesting and new about weight loss medications. I hope this lecture inspired you to understand the correct populations who should be utilizing weight loss medications and all of the information that's within the media and inspires you to continue to learn more about this growing topic. So thank you.
