 Welcome back to class everyone. I'm your instructor Dr. Carmen Swain. Today we are going to discuss the truth about weight loss. In today's society we are bombarded with information about what you should eat, what you should not eat, exercises you should do, exercises you should not do, pills you can take, plans you can follow, all to lose weight fast. Guaranteed for only $19.95 a month sometimes. It's a big money business and it's hard to tell who to trust and what's the truth. Today we are going to see what the science has to show. It's not a secret to drop pounds you need to eat less calories and move more. What you may not realize is that in your efforts to lose weight the key is to emphasize diet or exercise at different points in your take off efforts. Because it's easy to get overwhelmed by all the changes we are supposed to make on the road to weight loss. There are so many fitness apps, diet friendly foods, etc. and quite honestly as we've mentioned before behavior change is hard and in the vast majority of cases oftentimes the problem is people take on too much, get overwhelmed and quit altogether. We've talked about behavior change before. It's challenging to do. And if your goal is to lose weight you need to be good at behavior change. Do you know the most popular New Year's resolution? If you don't, the number one New Year's resolution is to lose weight. And do you know how most people plan to go about that? Well usually it's by goal number two, pledging to spend more hours at the gym. Is that what science says is the best plan to lose weight? Actually no, it's not. It is much easier to lose weight by modifying your diet than by trying to exercise more. So you might be thinking, which diet is right for me? Which one should I pick? Let's be super clear. Any diet, whether it be paleo, intermittent fasting, low carb, South Beach, vegetarian, etc. Whether you're cutting portion sizes or eliminating foods like processed foods, carbohydrates or whatever, this diet will result in weight loss. In the short term. The problem is, overwhelming results indicate that in over 98% of cases, weight loss is not sustainable. And that is why the perception to the general public is that no one ever really succeeds at long term weight loss. This belief stems not only from personal perspectives, but also the scientific community. Stunkard and McLaurin Hume's 1959 study of 100 obese individuals indicated that after two years of treatment, only 2% maintained a weight loss of 20 pounds or more. More recently, a New England Journal of Medicine editorial titled Losing Weight, an ill-fated New Year's Resolution echoed the same pessimistic message. So is it even possible to lose weight and keep it off? Yes, yes it is. Let's look at the science of best practices. To lose weight initially, it's important to emphasize reducing caloric intake rather than increasing your physical activity. A study from the University of Missouri highlights these suggestions. In this study, participants went to either Weight Watcher meetings for 12 weeks. Those participants lost 9 pounds. The participants who just joined a gym, they lost 3. I know that's just one study, but many, many studies have replicated these same findings over the past 20 years. The key is clear. To initiate weight loss, it is important you must change your diet rather than trying to exercise more. Once you have selected a diet that is right for you and you start to lose weight, I know, I get it. It's easy to be excited when we see those pounds dropping away. But I also think it's really important to know physiologically what is happening inside our body when we are shedding those pounds. This perspective helps to provide us with the much needed patience required for sustained weight loss. If you look at the graph shown here, it presents the general trend of the percentage of composition of that daily weight loss during the first month of dieting. As you see, approximately 70% of the weight loss over the first week of energy deficit consists of water loss. Thereafter, water loss progressively lessens, representing only about 20% of the weight lost in the second and third weeks. Concurrently, body fat loss accelerates from 25 up to 70%. During the fourth week of dieting, reductions in body fat produce 85% of the weight loss without a further increase in water loss. Protein's contribution to weight loss increases from 5% initially to about 15% after the fourth week. In practical terms, counseling efforts should emphasize that weight loss during the initial attempts to reduce weight, when successful, consists chiefly of water and not fat. It takes approximately four weeks, one month, to establish the desired pattern of fat loss for each pound of weight loss. So what strategies does the science show works to not only lose weight, but to keep weight off? First, let me start by saying there are only a few studies that have followed participants for longer intervals of time. In these studies, approximately 20% of individuals have been able to maintain a weight loss of 5 kg or about 11 pounds or more at the 5-year mark. Because longitudinal research, that is research that goes on and on, follows people year after year, is not only difficult to do, but also difficult to fund, several researchers named Dr. Wing and Dr. Hill have developed a way to do just that. Given the prevailing belief that few individuals succeeded at long-term weight loss, the National Weight Control Registry was developed in 1994 to identify and to investigate the characteristics of individuals who have succeeded at long-term weight loss. The registry is currently composed of a self-selected population of more than 10,000 individuals who are age 18 and older and who have lost at least 13 kg or 30 pounds or more and kept it off for at least one year. When individuals enroll in the registry, they are asked to complete a battery of questionnaires detailing how they originally lost the weight and how they are now maintaining this weight loss. Participants are subsequently followed annually to determine changes in their weight and their weight-related behaviors. Through this process, researchers have been able to identify specific strategies that are very consistent among the successful weight loss individuals. Before we get into what works, let's just start with the biggie that does not work. Portion control. We hear it all the time. You need to eat less calories to lose weight. That doesn't sound that hard. Just use my willpower. I guess I'll just eat a little bit less. It doesn't even sound that hard. The problem with this is this thing your body has that it doesn't sort of like but that it thrives on called homeostasis. Evolutionarily speaking, when you eat less, your body is like, fine, it's okay. There must not be any food available right now. No worries. We'll just slow down metabolism and wait for a wild wildebeest to appear in the thicket. Remember NEAT, that non-exercise activity thermogenesis? Well, this baby also has influence on your metabolism in relation to how much food you eat. And if you don't feed it very much, your NEAT goes down. You feed it a lot and it goes up. But over time, if you keep restricting portion sizes, your body will become grumpy and unhappy and it will start to scream at you. This is an innate survival mechanism meant to keep you from starving to death. And after weeks and weeks of successful portion control and sticking to a specific diet, eventually the screaming at you will cause you to overeat and break your diet until you reach or surpass even your original weight. So please keep this in mind. Portion control almost never works. Let's see what does. There are some strategies that were reported very consistently amongst successful weight loss participants. Consuming a low calorie diet and a low fat diet are amongst the top strategies for successful weight loss. How do you eat a low calorie, low fat diet without doing portion control? Calorie counting? Sidebar here. Most people can eliminate certain foods or reduce their weight loss by eating a low calorie diet. And successfully lose weight for quite a while. But what happens when you stop keeping the log or have that first piece of bread and then another? That's right, the weight creeps back up. And that sounds depressing, doesn't it? Well the science has shown that there is one method that's most successful to weight loss and that is eat more fiber. It makes you feel full. Plants. They are the most nutrient rich source of food on the planet and they are extremely water dense and low in fiber. You don't need to keep a log. You can eat as much as you want. Just eat more whole food plants. Just look at the figure shown here and you can see the results for yourself. Eating more fiber makes sense. Your body is satisfied because you can eat as much or even more than you usually do. When you eat a lot of fiber, it fills you up. You feel satisfied and you feel more satisfied. A good way to start to eat more whole foods is one, try to eliminate processed foods. Things like juice and soda are a good place to start from your diet. And then eat a whole fruit or vegetable or vegetable that you don't want to eat. Another characteristic of national weight control registry members is high levels of physical activity. Women in the registry reported expending an average of 2,500 kcals per week in physical activity and men reported an average of 33,000 kcals per week. These levels of activity would represent about one hour a day of moderate intensity activity. The most common activity reported is walking, reported by over 76% of participants. Another common activity is walking. Another commonly reported strategy was weighing yourself frequently. And the last common strategy amongst those who were successful at weight loss is to consume breakfast daily. The results are clear. If you want to lose weight, the easiest way to get the pounds off are to focus on your diet. The results are also equally clear that to keep that weight off and maintain weight loss, you must incorporate physical activity. Research has consistently shown programs that rely on diet only or exercise only are ineffective in long-term weight loss. When examining meta-analysis of various successful weight loss programs, those who exercise weight loss are not able to maintain weight loss. This is true for different types of populations, diets, and exercise interventions. So let's keep this in mind. It is true that weight loss is a very important factor in weight loss. It takes an average of two months for a new behavior, like eating vegetables before a main course, to turn into a habit. Once you are past the initial hump of making better food choices and that becomes second nature, now it's time to build on that. Once you are past the initial hump of making better food choices and that becomes second nature, now it's time to bump up your exercise. At this point, it won't be overwhelming, and this is a good time to start focusing on getting physical activity during most days. People who work out are nearly twice as likely to keep the pounds from piling back on compared to those who don't. The American Journal of Preventative Medicine and other research studies indicate that 90% of people who have kept off 30 pounds or more do an hour of exercise each day, which is similar to findings from the NASA study. There's no coincidence. When you exercise, you activate hormones that tend to favor using more fat as your fuel. And of course, you need to continue to eat well. Exercise does give you a little leeway, but it doesn't cover consistent fat. And of course, you need to continue to eat well. Exercise does give you a little leeway, but it doesn't cover consistent 3,000 calorie meals. That is, you can't exercise your way out of a bad diet. Of course, nobody can stay in dieting mode forever, which is why you want to embrace diet and exercise change as part of your healthy lifestyle. Emphasizing the positives, like how much better you feel, helps to cancel out any sort of sense or deprivation. And if that isn't motivating enough, exercise and good diet comes with built-in bonuses. You're likely to miss it if you stop. Being physically active isn't something you just turn on and turn off. It becomes part of who you are and how you feel. And let's not forget to drink our water. Scientists have examined if pre-meal water consumption facilitates weight loss amongst overweight and obese middle-aged and older adults. And they've also looked to examine if the pre-meal water consumption will reduce meal energy intake and if that's sustained after a 12-week period of increased water consumption. In this study, 48 adults, age 55 to 75 years of age with a BMI of 25 to 40 were assigned to one of two groups. A hypochloric diet plus 500 milliliters of water prior to each daily meal, known as the water group, or group 2, the hypochloric diet alone, the non-water group. At baseline and week 12, each participant had a test meal. They got to choose what they wanted to eat and how much they wanted to eat. Meal energy intake was assessed at each test meal and body weight was assessed weekly for 12 weeks. After 12 weeks, weight loss was 4.4 pounds greater in the water group than in the non-water group. And the water group showed a 44% greater decline in weight loss over the 12 weeks than the non-water group. The test meal energy intake was lower in the water group than the non-water group conditions at baseline, but not at week 12. Thus, when combined with a hypochloric diet, consuming 500 milliliters of water, approximately 2 cups of water prior to each meal, lends to greater weight loss than a hypochloric diet alone in middle-aged and older adults. This may be due in part due to an acute reduction in energy intake following the water ingestion. Another study examined whether increased intake of drinking water was associated with weight loss over 12 months in free-living women who were assigned to four popular weight loss diets. Mixed models were used to test for effects for absolute and relative increases in drinking water on changes in weight and body composition, controlling for baseline status, diet group, and changes in other beverage intake, the amount and consumption of foods consumed, and physical activity. Results indicate that absolute and relative increases in drinking water were associated with significant loss of body weight and fat over time, independent of the other covariates. The authors of this study suggest that drinking water may promote weight loss in overweight dieting women. Let's make sure we dodge these common exercise mistakes. One of the most common errors is to consider your workouts as free license to binge. Don't do it! One recent study found that people who were told that a one-mile walk was for exercise ate about twice as much after the walk as those who were told the outing was for exercise. Second, use every spare minute wisely. Finding an extra half hour to slip in a workout isn't always easy, so have a backup plan. Even a 10-minute cardio video can help to keep you on track. And no, you do not have to stick to the same routine every time. Do it! Don't be afraid to mix it up. You can't perform the same exercise over and over and over and expect to get the very same benefits. Women, particularly, who start a program tend to stick with cardio. But ladies, you need strength training. You need to be able to do it. And finally, don't give in to energy drain. A top excuse for not exercising is, I'm too tired. Just fake yourself out. Say, hey, self, I'm just going to go for a walk for 10 minutes. And most likely, you're going to get a lot of energy. I'm too tired. Just fake yourself out. Say, hey, self, I'm just going to go for a walk for 10 minutes. And most likely, you'll go longer. Because exercise energizes you.
