 The one activity you spend most of your life doing is sleeping. The average human spends 79 years on Earth and 26 of that, about one third, is spent sleeping. She also spends about seven years trying to get to sleep. But what's so special about sleeping? It turns out, a lot. Sleeping boosts your mental health, improves your physical well-being, your immunity, your weight regulation, and fertility. Welcome back to class, everyone. I'm Dr. Carmen Swain, your instructor for this course that examines fitness and your health. And today, we're going to explore how to make you sleep like a baby. Americans aren't spending enough time snoozing. In the last Gallup poll, the average American slept 6.8 hours a night, with 40% of Americans banking less than six hours. The nation hasn't always been this sleep deprived. If we look back to 1910, people slept an average of nine hours per night. Our culture of sleeplessness has been propelled by technologies like the light bulb and the internet, which have given us more opportunities to stay awake in an increasingly 24-7 world. But this modern day trend poses many health risks. A host of studies and reports have linked insufficient sleep to depression, ADHD, obesity, type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and Alzheimer's. Back in 2014, the CDC labeled sleep deprivation a public health epidemic, with over 70 million adults suffering from a sleep disorder. Sleeplessness is also connected to other severe consequences. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration estimates that drowsy driving causes 1,550 deaths and 40,000 injuries annually in the United States. And what about kids? Are they getting enough sleep? Technology is part of our lives. Not just our lives, but children's too. It provides entertainment, educational opportunities. But could it be hurting children? And how exactly is that? Research shows that technology at bedtime does affect sleep duration. And it doesn't matter if that technology comes in the form of TV, phone, video game, or computer. When technology is used before bedtime, there's a reduction in hours of sleep. When we examine the research and examine the different types of technology versus non-technology activities, things like reading a book or taking a bath, we see that those that engage in technology have about an hour less of sleep per night with the use of tech. What's the big deal? Well, new research reveals that one hour of sleep deprivation could be a very big deal. Children who fall short by just one hour per night have a higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes. This alarming data point comes at a time when fewer Americans and children than ever are getting the daily recommended amount of sleep. The search for sleep has become a cultural obsession, fueling the rise of an entire industry. But with glaring laptop screens and grueling work schedules keeping us awake, sleepless nights aren't going away anytime soon. Interestingly, athletic teens sleep better than their couch potato peers and also have fewer problems concentrating at school. Teachers in Switzerland asked 434 adolescents with an average age of 17 to keep a log of their sleep and daytime habits for one week. The 258 student athletes who were part of the quote Swiss Olympic classes exercised about 17 and a half hours a week. The 176 sedentary teens exercised for only about 4.5 hours a week. The teen athletes reported waking fewer times during the night, having higher energy levels during the day, and a greater ability to concentrate than their less active peers. This study demonstrates that in adolescence, being an athlete is highly predictive of high sleep quality and also shorter sleep latency. Sleep onset latency is the duration of time from turning the light off to falling asleep. Usually sleep latency is less than 20 minutes. The study also indicates that being an athlete is highly indicative of low daytime tiredness and higher concentration during the day. Most Americans are aware they aren't getting enough sleep, which has spurred the growth of an entire industry. Back in the 1980s, insomniacs were simply told, sleep more. The concept of sleep medicine didn't really take off until the 90s and early 2000s, when medical terms like sleep disorder and sleep aid entered common use. Consumers spent $41 billion on sleep-related products in 2015. A more recent figure showed that figure to be $52 billion. This consumer category includes much more than just prescription and over-the-counter sleep aids, starting with the introduction of SelectComfort's Sleep Number Bed. In the 1980s, this $13 billion mattress industry has innovated to keep consumers from lying awake. We also see meditation and mindfulness as being promoted as ways to get a good night's sleep. And sleep-defrived consumers are turning to tech-enabled devices. Some products use sensors that sit on or under mattresses to track movement, sounds, and breathing. Apps like the Sleep Cycle, SleepBot, and Pillow use smartphones to do the same. It also time alarms so that users wake up during their lightest sleep phase. Insomniacs can even download apps that play relaxing sounds and adult bedtime stories designed specifically to calm the mind. Organizations of all types are adapting to America's need for some shut-eye. Silicon Valley has led the charge, implementing flexible work schedules and other sleep-supporting perks. HubSpot, a marketing software company, has a dedicated nap room, complete with a hammock and cloud-covered walls. It makes sense. Well-rested workers make better decisions, are less stressed, and are less prone to make errors. Likewise, studies show that students whose schools that start later have better impulse control earn higher grades and aren't involved in as many car accidents. Researchers don't completely understand how exactly physical activity improves sleep. We may never be able to pinpoint the mechanism in full because it is multifocal. However, what we do know is that moderate aerobic exercise increases the amount of slow-wave sleep you can attain. Slow-wave sleep refers to deep sleep, where the brain and the body have a chance to rejuvenate. Exercise can also work to stabilize your mood and decompress the mind. An important cognitive process that is important for naturally transitioning into sleep. The timing of exercise relative to sleep may matter. Some people may find that exercising close to bedtime seems to keep them up at night. How does working out affect the mind? Aerobic exercise causes the body to release endorphins. These chemicals can create a level of activity in the brain that keeps some people awake. These individuals should exercise at least one to two hours before going to bed, giving endorphin levels times to wash out and the brain time to wind down. Exercise also raises your core body temperature. The effect of exercise in some people is like taking a hot shower that wakes you up in the morning. Elevation in core body temperature signals the body clock that it's time to be awake. After about 30 to 90 minutes, the core body temperature starts to fall. This decline will help to facilitate sleepiness. Despite these biological responses to exercise, some people find the time of day they exercise doesn't make a difference at all. Whether it's in the early morning or close to bedtime, they'll all see a benefit relative to their sleep. Non-REM sleep, known as slow wave or deep sleep, is super important. This phase is essential for muscle recovery and restoring the body. You need to ensure that you get enough time in non-REM cycle. Sleep has a significant impact on muscle recovery. If you don't get enough of it, you're not going to feel rested in the morning and your muscles will not recover properly. Aside from being groggy the next day, another pitfall of not getting enough quality sleep is that it affects all your efforts in the gym. While you may be able to quote unquote function just fine on only a few hours of sleep, doing so still short changes your body composition goals. To understand this, let's first understand the two main stages of sleep so that we can better understand the sleep's impact on muscle recovery. REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep, occurs in cycles of about 90 to 120 minutes throughout the night and it accounts for about a quarter of total sleep time in adult humans. REM sleep dominates the latter half of the sleep period, especially the hours before waking. REM sleep provides the energy to the brain that supports it during the waking hours and is necessary for restoring the mind. Non-REM sleep, also known as deep sleep. This phase is essential for muscle recovery and for restoring the body. This sleep accounts for about 40% of total sleep time. During this phase, your blood pressure drops and your breathing becomes deeper and slower. Your brain is resting with very little activity, so the blood supply available to your muscle increases. This is the result of a non-REM sleep cycle, delivering extra amounts of oxygen and nutrients, which facilitate their healing and growth. Muscles and body tissues are rejuvenated during non-REM sleep. So now that we know that the non-REM sleep cycle is the most important for muscle recovery, is the secretion of growth hormone. As your body enters into non-REM deep sleep stage, your pituitary gland releases a shot of growth hormone that stimulates tissue growth and muscle repair. But not enough sleep causes a sharp decline in growth hormone secretion. Growth hormone deficiency is associated with loss of muscle mass and reduced exercise capacity. So sleeping for 7-9 hours per night is crucial, especially if you are looking to change body composition, increase muscle mass, and or if you want to be ready for your personal training session the next day. Sleep enhances muscle recovery through protein synthesis and human growth hormone release. If you want to grow or lean out, stop procrastinating and get to sleep. The idea that exercise and sleep are somehow correlated may not be shocking news to you, but the benefits of exercise on sleep don't just apply to gym rats, athletes, and marathon runners. You may have resigned yourself to a life of mediocre sleep knowing that you don't follow a vigorous fitness routine, but that's simply not true. Even a small increase in the number of steps you take each day, trying the stairs, walking to class, riding your bike to campus could make your nightly snoozes more restful. And here's the science to back it up. A study by researchers at Brandeis University published by the National Sleep Foundation found evidence that physical activity, even low impact exercise as commonplace as walking, can help improve an individual's quality of sleep. To determine if low impact physical activity like walking positively affected sleep in healthy adults, researchers observed 59 participants over a four week period. During this time, each individual participated in an intervention aimed at increasing their daily steps as the primary outcome. According to research results and conclusion, more activity was consistently linked to deeper Zs for participants. While this was an observational study and therefore does not have a direct or causal link yet, these positive correlations between increased daily movement and better sleep suggest that even a slight boost in activity could reward you with life changing results. These findings were supported by a similar study which quantified the number of steps per person and correlated that directly with improved sleep quality. That is, more steps equals not only more sleep, but better sleep. What about people with sleep disorders like insomnia? Insomnia is a common sleep disorder that can make it hard to fall asleep, hard to stay asleep, or cause you to wake up too early and not be able to get back to sleep. You may still feel tired when you wake up. Insomnia can sap not only your energy level and mood, but also your health, your work performance, and quality of life. How much sleep is enough varies from person to person, but most adults need seven to eight hours a night. At some point, many adults experience short-term insomnia, which lasts for days or maybe even weeks. It's usually the result of stress or a traumatic event. But some people have long-term or chronic insomnia that lasts for a month or even more. Insomnia may be the primary problem, or it may be associated with other medical conditions or medications. But you don't have to put up with sleepless nights. Simple changes in your daily habits can often help. Scientists have studied the effects of exercise upon sedentary men and women in their 60s who are diagnosed with insomnia. The participants were involved in a 16-week course, an exercise intervention, and it was found that those who were in the exercise intervention not only awoke less often, but they also slept longer than the study participants who did not exercise. Interestingly, these results only began after the exercise intervention was complete, not during the 16 weeks, indicating the importance of chronic and regular exercise as a treatment approach. Another finding was that volunteers who had slept poorly had significantly shorter workouts the following day. Overall study results observed that improvement after chronic exercise was similar to improvement after the use of prescribed drugs. There are many studies that show people who are more physically active sleep longer and more deeply than those who are sedentary. But what about those with sleep apnea? For adults with sleep apnea, a dangerous condition that stresses the heart and repeatedly interrupts sleep when breathing briefly slows or stops, resulting in increased blood pressure, links to higher risks for a host of cardiovascular problems, including strokes, heart attacks, heart failure, and fluttering heartbeats called arrhythmias. But an exercise program that combined brisk walking and weight training cut the severity of this disorder by a quarter. That's as much as some kinds of surgery. And the most compelling point of this research was that this 25% reduction was achieved without any reduction in body weight. Being overweight is a well-known risk factor for sleep apnea, and previous studies have shown that losing weight may improve the condition. But for a 25% reduction due to weight loss, you actually need to lose about 10% of your body weight. For study participants who weighed on average more than 220 pounds means they'd have to lose 22 pounds for them to achieve the same benefit that was achieved just through simple exercise. A separate analysis on the same sleep study volunteers found that exercise also improved daytime sleepiness, decreased fatigue, and sharpened thinking compared to a program of light stretching. And further research indicates the intensity of your exercise may have something to do with this. Research indicates that the more vigorously you exercise, the less likely you are to suffer from sleep apnea. Can you really sleep to lose weight? In common weight loss advice, get more sleep should figure just as prominently with eat less and move more. There is strong evidence that lack of sleep is contributing to the obesity epidemic. Among the behavioral factors that have been shown to impede weight loss, insufficient sleep is by far the most prominent factor gaining attention and recognition. A 2010 study in which participants were randomly assigned to sleep five and a half hours versus eight and a half hours every night for 14 days. And participants in the study all cut their daily calorie intake by 680 calories and also slept in a lab. The participants who slept for five and a half hours lost 55 percent less body fat and 60 percent more of their lean body mass than compared to those who slept longer. In other words, the sleep deprived people held onto their fat tissue and instead lost muscle. And in another recent study, researchers examined 245 women in a six month weight loss program and found that those who slept more than seven hours a night and those who reported better sleep quality were 33 percent more likely to succeed in their weight loss efforts. In a large analysis of the sleep exercise link, researchers looked at 36 studies, a meta-analysis including 635,000 people from around the world and found that adults who didn't get enough sleep were 50 percent more likely to be obese and children who didn't get enough sleep were 90 percent more likely to be obese compared with those who got more sleep. We know that people's success in weight loss programs varies greatly, but researchers suggest that including sleep advice within weight loss programs can greatly improve success rates. While the exact way that losing sleep may contribute to obesity is not completely acceptable, studies have shown that lack of sleep affects the part of the brain that controls pleasure eating. It's also been shown that levels of hormones, leptin, ghrelin, cortisol, and orexin, all of which are involved in appetite or eating, are affected by lack of sleep. Healthcare providers might be better able to help their overweight and obese patients by screening for sleep disorders. Future research should examine ways that people could get more sleep. Successful weight management is complicated and a good understanding of the root causes of weight gain and barriers to weight management is essential to success. While getting more sleep is not the solution for everyone who is struggling to lose weight, an accumulating body of evidence suggests that sleeping habits should not be overlooked when prescribing a weight reduction program to a patient with obesity. Sleep plays an important role in weight management. People who sleep enough have lower body mass indexes than people who do not. And recent research suggests that sleep deprivation causes weight gain. In a study of women who only had four hours of sleep at night, they ate an additional 329 calories the next day than they did after they slept for nine hours. Men ate 263 calories more. In another study, 11 volunteers spent 14 days at a sleep center on two occasions. During one period, they slept five and a half hours a night, and during the other, they slept eight and a half hours. When the participants were sleep deprived, they increased their nighttime snacking and were more likely to choose high carbohydrate snacks. So how exactly does sleep help you to lose weight? Well, let's find out. Studies have shown that lack of sleep affects the parts of the brain that control pleasure eating. It's also been shown that levels of hormones leptin and ghrelin, cortisol and orexin, all of which are involved in appetite or eating, are highly affected by lack of sleep. The biggest revelation about the connection between sleep and weight loss, and the biggest challenge for you if you're not getting at least seven solid hours of sleep each night, is that sleeping too little impacts your hormone levels in ways that can undermine the efforts of even the most determined dieter. There are several hormones that link sleep with weight loss. Leptin and ghrelin are two hormones that play major roles in stimulating and suppressing your appetite. Ghrelin's job is to boost your appetite, increase fat production, and make your body grow, which are undesirable effects once you've passed your teenage years. It's pretty easy to figure out why this hormone is the last thing a dieter needs to have circulating around in excess. On the other hand, leptin is responsible for suppressing hunger. Leptin is the hormone that says, Unfool! Back away from the table and put that fork down. Lack of sleep lowers the levels of leptin in your blood and heightens the levels of ghrelin, which results in an increase of appetite. So after even one night of too little sleep, leptin and ghrelin become little dietary gremlins, bent on diet-wrecking mischief. The lower leptin levels mean that you still feel hungry after you eat. And ghrelin, for its part, it magnifies the problem by stimulating your appetite, which sets the stage for a day of high simple carbohydrates and high calorie feasting after a restless night. We've all been there before, right? But the good news is that the reverse is also true. Getting enough sleep decreases hunger and will therefore help you to lose weight. Another important hormone mentioned before that is affected by sleep is growth hormone. During sleep, your pituitary gland secretes more growth hormone than during your waking hours. Growth hormones stimulate cell regeneration, reproduction, and growth. These hormones are also known to aid you in building muscles. This is why higher levels of growth hormones result in heightened metabolism. With a higher metabolism, you burn energy faster, which will also lead to easier weight loss. We've all heard the phrase, beauty sleep. But is there actually any truth to it? Can sleep actually make you more attractive? Researchers from Sweden thought they'd find the answer. The researchers asked 25 university students, some male and some female, to be guinea pigs in their sleep experiment. The volunteers, who were given payment for their help, were sent home with a kit that would measure their nighttime movements to check that they had not cheated and slept when they should not have. The volunteers were asked to get a good night's sleep for two consecutive nights. And then, a week later, they were asked to restrict themselves to only four hours of sleep per night for two nights in a row. The researchers took makeup-free photos of the volunteers after both the good and the bad sleep sessions. Next, they asked 122 strangers. Females and males living in Sweden's capital city of Stockholm to have a look at the photos and rate them on attractiveness, health, sleepiness, and trustworthiness. As well as asking them, how much would you like to socialize with this person in the picture? The strangers were good at judging if the person they were looking at was tired and if they were sleepy, their attractiveness score suffered. The strangers also said they would be less willing to socialize with the tired students, who they also perceived to be less healthy. It's evolutionary. People don't want to hang out with people who might be ill, whereas someone who looks energetic and fit will hold a lot more appeal. The strangers were good at judging if the person they were looking at was tired and if they were sleepy, their attractiveness score suffered. The strangers also said they would be less willing to socialize with the tired students, who they also perceived to be less healthy. It's all part of the evolutionary process. People don't want to hang around people who might be tired and ill, whereas someone who looks rested also appears energetic and fit and will thus hold a lot more appeal. So let's wrap it up with some takeaway messages related to sleep and exercise. Exercisers say they sleep better. People who exercise report better sleep than those who say they don't exercise. More than three-fourths of exercisers said their sleep quality was very good or fairly good in the past two weeks, compared to just over one-half of non-exercisers. Vigorous exercisers report the best sleep. Vigorous exercisers are almost twice as likely as non-exercisers to say, I had a good night's sleep, every night or almost every night, and they are the least likely to report sleep problems. Non-exercisers are the sleepiest and have the highest risk for sleep apnea. Nearly one-fourth of non-exercisers qualify as sleepy, using a standard screening measure. Only 12% of exercisers qualify as sleepy, and 44% of non-exercisers showed a moderate risk for sleep apnea, compared to 26% of light exercisers and 19% of vigorous exercisers. We also know less time sitting is associated with better sleep and health. Those who sit for fewer than eight hours a day were significantly more likely to report very good sleep quality. And lastly, exercising at any time of the day appears to be good for sleep. Contrary to the long-lasting sleep hygiene advice, exercising close to bedtime was not associated with poorer sleep quality. In fact, exercise was linked to better sleep, no matter what time of day. So let's make sure we exercise to ensure a better night's rest.
