 Welcome to week six, where we'll talk about food on a healthy budget. Is it true that healthy foods cost more? Sometimes. Compare this apple, which we know to be rich in fiber, quercetin, vitamin C, and other nutrients, and it might cost anywhere between 45 cents and $1.29. If you're buying organic, it's probably closer to $1.59 each. And then we have on the right-hand side, a 30-pack of snacks. These snacks probably contain some B vitamins and about double the amount of calories as the apple. If we're lucky, we can find these on sale for about 43 cents a pack. So comparing the cost of these two items, that pack of sugary snack might cost half as much as the apple. We'll take another example, comparing fast food hamburger meal with French fries and a soda, like to a healthier option at perhaps a sit-down restaurant. This one in particular reminds me of Northstar and their veggie burger. That burger's going to be rich in fruits, vegetables, fiber, all kinds of nutrients, making it a much healthier choice than the fast food option. But it's probably also going to be a good $8 or $9 more expensive. Eating out can be cheaper than eating at home, but eating out can also be a lot more expensive. So strategies for lowering food costs are going to be eating at home, but we'll also talk about how to lower those food costs when you are eating out as well. We'll talk about making a plan, shopping smart and reducing food wastes. What does the research say about how expensive a home cooked meal is versus eating out? We see here that the most recent suggestion is that the average home cooked meal is about $4.23 versus $16 for eating out. The exact cost really depends on a variety of factors, including a person's lifestyle and their food choices. It may also depend on which meal you're eating out, as sometimes breakfast can be cheaper option compared to lunch and dinner. When making meals at home, that average cost probably depends on how smart you're shopping and whether or not you're choosing proteins that are affordable compared to those that can get quite expensive. But overall, eating out can cost over $13,000 more per year compared to cooking at home. So maybe this is a good incentive in addition to the fact that eating at home is often more nutritious, less high in sodium, less high in fat and less high in added sugars. Some pro tips for getting started with eating and drinking at home would be to just start somewhere and start simple. You can think about replacing one meal out with one at home each week. Maybe there's a meal that's particularly expensive for you, but it just happens to be very convenient and often feels like a reward. Maybe start there with how you can make a change so that you can replicate that meal at home or perhaps replicate it with a meal that you find equally satisfying. Another tip is to brew coffee or tea at home. With the cost of coffee and coffee shops continuing to go up, right? Switch out that specialty beverage or brew for a nice home brewed version. And if you're lucky, you can ask for a coffee maker or an espresso maker, something that suits your needs. You can also use coffee as a gift to make this even easier. Another idea is to invite friends to eat with you. Sometimes it's not very fun to cook for one person. Sometimes it's challenging to do just that. So invite your friends over to eat with you or maybe start a dinner club or a meal club where you rotate houses or rotate who's in charge of making that meal. Finally, drinking water instead of soda or juices is another great way to save on costs. Sure, you might have more of an investment upfront if you're purchasing a water bottle or two or three, but overall you will end up saving money. And typically those sodas and juices are not offering a lot of nutrition, but mostly just calories or empty fluid. Now, if you do find yourself eating out, because we all do, every once in a while, think about how to save money. One good way to do that is to skip the drinks, which are often marked up significantly at restaurants. Also skip dessert, as many high volume restaurants outsource their desserts. So it's something that you could buy at the store just like they do. Also skipping dessert may help you save on calories, empty calories or excess calories that you're really not even hungry for. And maybe switching that out for having an Oreo or a small cookie or a small piece of chocolate at home would be a much better way of finishing off the night. Think about sharing a meal, as oftentimes restaurant servings are quite large. Sharing a meal can also be kind of fun and you could even share a meal and an appetizer and therefore having a couple of different dishes and maintaining that variety that you might like when you eat out. You could go to happy hour and use the happy hour prices to help with discounted foods and drinks. And lastly, order an appetizer as your meal, right? Maybe there's something that you really wanna try and likely in some cases, because of the size of the appetizer, you may not even be hungry by the time that you get to your actual meal. After you figure out how you're going to eat at home, wanna think about making a plan. Choose one time a week to meal plan. Maybe this is on Sunday night when you're watching a little bit of TV and catching up with friends. Maybe it's more like a Monday night or a Wednesday night in the middle of the week, knowing that you're gonna grocery shop in a couple of days. Whatever that time is for you, right? Make it a routine and something that you carve out to do on a regular basis. You don't have to plan everything out for the week. That could get overwhelming. What you wanna do is start by just planning out one or two, maybe three at the most larger meals to cook each week and then get as much done on the weekends as possible with some meal prep. See what you already have. What's in your cupboards? What's in your freezer? What's in the refrigerator? And what can you use in your meal plan this week? Then write out your meal plan. Now you might wanna do this on paper, in a journal, or maybe on your phone, which will help you. There's some ways in which they can help you create a list. Maybe you write it on the refrigerator and keep a list going there. And when the mood strikes you, you write down some new ideas. Wherever it is, again, make it a habit, designate a spot and write out your meal plan. After you make that meal plan, you'll be able to make a grocery list with all of the items that you need in order to make those meals. There's definitely some good ways to go about doing this. And again, I like to keep it simple. Finding recipes that have a long list of ingredients that you may or may not have is frustrating and it makes it overwhelming. So look for recipes with five ingredients or less. If you find a recipe that you really wanna try and it has more than five ingredients, then maybe look to see which ingredients you can leave out. Not all the herbs and spices are always needed. Also choose recipes that take 20 minutes or less prep time. I like to find recipes that have 10 minutes or less prep time. The prep time is really the amount of time that you're gonna spend in the kitchen working on it. It doesn't include like the baking time or the cooking time, which is really time that you can spend doing other things. So 20 minutes or less is a good starting point. You will get more efficient with your time the more that you cook and build your skills, maybe even take a couple of classes on YouTube on how to do knife cuts. And you can invite friends to do this together so that meal prepping becomes a fun activity, something social. Choose a time to make these meals when you have the most time. Figuring out again, when is that for you? When won't you be stressed about turning in homework or getting an assignment done? Use that time then whatever it is that you have. If you designate that you have 20 minutes to meal prep or make a meal, great. If you have 30, use 30. If you have 60 minutes at a time, maybe there's some extra things you can get done to help you prep for breakfast and lunches in the coming week. In addition to those couple of dinner meals that you have slated from your meal plan. I thought I'd share with you some of the resources that college students and others often find helpful or exciting. One of those is a website called Budget Bytes. I really like this because it is simple. Like we said, recipes with few ingredients, pretty short prep times, depending on the recipe that you choose. And I like that they give you the cost per serving. So you can really determine if it's going to fit in your food budget for the week. And includes all kinds of foods. You see here on the webpage right now, they're featuring an in season type of cookie, as well as more of a dinner recipe, as well as like a side dish or like a accoutrement, like a topping that you might use on top of vegetable or meat dish. So check out Budget Bytes and see what you think. They have a lot of great tabs that can help you with a variety of different aspects when you're planning your meals. Another idea is to make a simple list yourself of the foods that you like across categories. When we're talking about making a meal, we want to think about including at least three different types of foods from three different food groups. I like to make a sheet where I'm just listing out a bunch of proteins, followed by a bunch of grains, followed by a bunch of vegetables. If we use that like my plate scenario, about half my plate's going to become the vegetable, a quarter of it's going to be the grain, and a quarter of it's going to be the protein. And by making a list like this of all the different possibilities that either I like or I have on hand, then I can mix and match and get creative with what I make. Or I can just keep it really simple. I also like to choose proteins that are quick. They cook quickly or they take very little prep time. So those are things like shrimp, pork loin that you just have to take out of the bag and put in the oven, salmon that I can place on a sheet with some vegetables and therefore it gets made all at the same time. Sometimes I like to do refried beans, which don't really even involve any cooking at all. So it's good to have these options there, especially when you have a busy week. Those grain items are going to be a mix of whole grains and refined grains. Some of the grains are really vegetables like mashed potatoes and that's okay. Mashed potatoes are in tater tots or are a starchy type of vegetable, often with the nutrient composition of other grains. And finally, those vegetables, I can either do raw or cooked. And I can think about different ways of making them either from a frozen bag or from a raw state, maybe roasted in the oven. I like to think here too about using a lot of different colored vegetables. Remember that every different color of vegetable is going to provide a different set of nutrients and antioxidants. So when you're planning your meals, kind of think through the different colors and what you want to see represented on that week. And I have...
