 I have a little note at the bottom for me or for my family to add in to say, hey, I got an idea for next week, let's try this. I'll also feature one app in particular. With the caveat of saying that there are actually quite a few of these types of apps that will not only help you meal plan, but they'll help you select your favorite recipes, create and create your grocery lists. It's kind of like a one size or one stop fits all. You can sync it with your different devices. I believe you can share it out with friends and family and get ideas from them as well. So when you have a recipe that you like, you save it to the app. It helps generate a grocery list from the recipe. And then it helps you figure out when to make that meal or how to slate it into your overall meal plan based on your calendar. There might be a little bit of a cost involved with some of these apps, but I do feel like it's worth it, especially with the money that you're saving, cooking at home versus eating out. Once you have that meal plan together, you're really gonna focus on shopping smart. What do we mean by that? That means this is where the rubber hits the road. This is where you're gonna go to the grocery store and use the budget that you have to buy the supplies that you need for as long as possible. One of the best ways to do this is to buy a mix of shelf stable, frozen and perishable items. That way, you don't have to rely on just having fresh, which eventually is gonna go bad. Like those bananas, there is only gonna be a couple days in that window that you're really gonna like the texture and consistency of that banana. All the other days, it's gonna be too raw or too ripe. That can happen to a variety of different fruits and vegetables. So it can be good to stock up on frozen forms of fruits and vegetables as well as canned forms of fruits and vegetables. When you're looking for those frozen and canned options, look for the options in which it's pretty much just the fruit or vegetable itself. Added sauces can really add flavor, but they can also add quite a bit of fat too. So just look at the label and determine if that's something that's fitting into your goals for the day. With the fruit, oftentimes it's canned in either a heavy syrup or a light syrup or in its own juices. Look for those that are canned in their own juices. That has the least amount of extra sugars or added sugars. Frozen, fresh, canned fruits and vegetables are all nutritious. So there's no reason to feel like you shouldn't have one form of them just because it's not fresh. Oftentimes these days the processes used to freeze and to can are just as good as retaining nutrients compared to that fresh version that may have traveled thousands of miles to get to the grocery store to sit for quite some time. Anytime that fruits and vegetables are exposed to light and air, they're gonna lose nutrients. So frozen and canned options, we don't have to feel bad about. Use them, shop smart. Another idea is to make sure that you're buying in season produce. When it's in season, it means cheaper. I'll show you some ideas in order to identify when fruits and vegetables are in fact in season. Also finding whole grains that are cheap is a good important tip. There's lots of options here. Brown rice, whole grain pasta, quinoa, whole wheat bread, oats and oatmeal, as well as cornmeal are all very affordable and there's a whole grain options to put into the mix. This is a site from USDA that I really like. It helps us see which are the fruits and vegetables that are the most affordable. And it's pretty interactive. So this is just a partial viewing of what it will do. But it allows the user to select specific fruits or vegetables in the desired form, such as fresh. And then two drop down menus control the output displayed. If a user selects vegetables rather than fruits, and then they can select something like sweet corn from the upper drop down menu as the type of vegetable. And you can also set the lower drop down menu in the form of that vegetable that you want to have, canned, fresh or frozen will all be displayed. So it really gives you a sense of how to compare across fruits, but also comparing in the form that makes the most sense. In this case, the fruit that was chosen looks like it's apricots, apples, grapes, watermelon, and it's comparing some of the prices of those fruits across canned, dried, fresh and juice. Right away we noticed some trends that those fresh options really vary all the way from 0.24 or 0.24 cents per serving of watermelon up to apricots, fresh apricots that are $1.41 per serving. This tells us that there are definitely some fruits and vegetables that are a lot more affordable than others regardless of what season we're in. Often those are things that are a little bit larger in size, like watermelon, cantaloupe, honeydew, pineapple. But this chart will help you determine lots of other ideas. We can also see that fresh isn't always the most expensive. Sometimes canned is the most expensive. And on here we do not see represented frozen fruit, which is also a good option in some cases. There's another listing that you could reference. I put the website here. It comes from a site called How to Cook. And it has an ultimate fruit and veggie price chart. This price chart is much too big to include on a single PowerPoint slide. It has like at least 50 different fruits and vegetables at all different price points. I started off with the lowest price points. Again, these are set up so that they are comparing fruits and vegetables in terms of a serving size or how much you would typically eat. And you'll see that pinto beans, right, or the cheapest dried pinto beans, are the cheapest form of vegetables on this list. But there are a couple things here that might really surprise you, such as seeing fresh potatoes that are very affordable at 20 cents a serving. You see that watermelon again, followed by a lot of beans and lentils. Carrots, whole raw fresh carrots also show up at 24 cents per serving, as well as apple juice from concentrate. So I have a couple of slides here that allows you to kind of see the progression as the fruits and vegetables get more expensive. But I noticed that there are still a lot of really good options, bananas, cucumbers, lettuce, green beans, right? These are all foods that are quite affordable. The USDA also has a site that allows us to see what seasonal or in season produce is. And you can't tell here, but if you were to go to this site and click on something in particular, like carrots, it would tell you a lot more about carrots, how to fix carrots, how to prepare carrots, some fun recipes that you'll find carrots in. So if you go to this USDA seasonal produce guide, I just selected the one for fall. Maybe there's fruits and vegetables here that you have no idea what to do with. And that's part of the fun. Selecting something, learning a little bit more about it, and perhaps giving it a try when it is in season, that means most tasty and most affordable. A lot of people these days are focused on protein and making sure that they get enough protein in their diet. In fact, a lot of people are shooting for like, really high protein diet. So what do we do about that? How do we eat proteins on a budget? Some low cost protein foods include beans, peas, and lentils, such as kidney beans, split peas, and garbanzo beans or chickpeas. These can come in a dried form, or my preferred source is a canned form. In the canned form, they're already cooked and ready to go. I'm basically just opening up that can, rinsing it out, rinsing it off, and using the beans or lentils that are in there. Beans, peas, and lentils cost less than similar amounts of other protein foods. So you get a lot of bang for your buck. And those beans and peas also count as vegetables. So you're getting your protein and your vegetables on a single food. However, for people who like to eat meat or enjoy meat, you can lower meat costs by buying the family size or the value pack and freezing what you don't use. Meat tends to freeze pretty well, all forms of it. So even if you buy it fresh, you can put it in the freezer until you need it later. You can also use that same approach that we saw with fruits and vegetables to buy canned tuna or salmon, which is often the cheapest form in which those fish come. It's also really convenient. Not canned, maybe you buy it in a tuna pack. And if you're buying it fresh, look for the form that is the least, you know, has the most affordable. Oftentimes that will be like a farmed version of salmon versus a wild form of salmon. Farmed salmon and wild salmon have their advantages and disadvantages. That farm-raised salmon may not be as rich in omega-3s as the wild-caught salmon, but the farm-raised salmon may also be lower in PCBs or other toxins. So they have their trade-offs and it's okay to kind of mix and match and have farmed fish or farmed salmon every once in a while. Choose those lean meats like chicken or turkey or even ground beef. Just make sure it's lean, at least 93% lean ground beef. And don't forget about eggs and dairy and dairy alternatives, which are a great low-cost option that are easy to make. And what about that good old peanut butter and jelly sandwich, right? Peanut butter is an affordable protein. It's also versatile, right? You can put it on a sandwich, but you can also put it in peanut butter or on top of pancakes and use it to really help boost the protein content of your bread. In addition to snacks, who doesn't like this time of year an apple with some peanut butter on it? The last idea about food on a healthy budget is to try to reduce food waste by planning to use leftovers, freezing items when you have too much of them or they're about to go to waste, or adopt an additional food waste. Planning for leftovers can seem a little daunting at first, especially if you're a person who doesn't like leftovers. What do you do then? Well, leftovers don't have to taste terrible. You can often use a protein such as chicken to become chicken salad or chicken quesadillas or throw it into a soup. You can use leftover vegetables as well. Where you might have integrated it into one dish the night before and are now making something else out of it. You can use artificial intelligence to come up with all kinds of ideas for ways to plan and use leftovers. Another idea here is to freeze it. A lot of times we have too much, we accidentally bought too much of the fresh option, and now we need to freeze it. I think about this when I think about those bananas, right? When they're past the state at which I would ever eat one fresh, I can throw it in the freezer and eventually make some ice cream or some muffins or some banana bread out of it later. You can use this same technique with things like sweet potatoes. So if you have too many of them, you can mash them up and you can use them to make a little bit of a mess. There's lots of tricks to learn here. Again, the more you kind of look, open your mind up to how to use fresh potatoes and how to use them in the freezer. I'm going to show you a couple of tips to use when you're cooking. So first of all, you need to use your hands. You need to use your hands to help you get to where you want to go. You want to use your hands to help you get to where you want to go. You want to use your hands to help you get to where you want to go. Open your mind up to how to use freezing it or how to save on reducing food waste, the easier that it gets. Using that use it up mentality, right, can be a fun way to gather all the ingredients at risk of being wasted and get creative. Hulinary creative. Almost anything can be tossed into soups, stir fries, tacos and salads. I hope you enjoyed this presentation and as you're thinking about different ways in which you can bring your food costs down. Enjoy.
