 Welcome to week eight, finding research articles. This week, we're going to talk about the next step and the special explorations project that requires you to find two peer reviewed articles using a literature search of a research database. In order to do this, we want to break it down into steps that are manageable. We're going to look at how to find the evidence, what types of research databases to use, the research articles themselves, how to find them, how to evaluate the evidence, and then using that APA citation style. Research is a muscle. The more you use it, the stronger it becomes. Searching through scholarly databases is different from an ordinary internet search through Google or other search aggregators. Most library and research databases require precision searching, an effective set of search terms in a specific order that will return the most relevant and precise searches based on your research question. A search strategy is an organized structure of key terms used to search a database. Databases will not understand your search if it is entered as a full or complete sentence or question. So for that reason, it's necessary to break your research question down into main concepts and keywords. For example, if you were searching or had a topic related to iron supplementation in female runners, you would identify some of the key terms in that question. Some of them seem to be things like iron or athletes or runner or female. Keep in mind that searching is an iterative process, so it's not likely that your first try will be your best. Many times it takes editing and revising search strategies to find the results that will be most relevant to your research question. Your search is likely to be complex and involve a number of steps, so give yourself plenty of time to work on this. The slide shows a research article as it appears in a research database called PubMed. PubMed is a free database available to all. It is published by the National Institutes of Health, specifically the National Library of Medicine. So when you find an article in PubMed, you see a lot of different information on the slide. You find out its title, who the authors are, and you can see the abstract on the homepage for this article. And at the bottom of the abstract, there are keywords. And while I thought iron might be a key term that I would want to use, I see here that they've used the term serum ferritin instead, which is the way that iron, one of the ways in which iron is measured in the blood. I also see key terms of athletes, clinical trial, iron, iron deficiency, prebiotic and probiotic, which I may not have thought of. So I can add those to my potential search key terms. We'll show you how to use the MeSH database and PubMed, one of the many search engines to find scientific articles. Using the MeSH database allows you to determine the best key terms for your searches. You navigate to the PubMed home website, pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, and then look at Explore and click on MeSH database. From here, you can use tutorials to help you learn how to use this search, but I'll demonstrate with an example. If I think I want to use the term iron, I can put that word in the MeSH and press the search button. It will let me know the different key terms that include the word iron. If I click on just iron, it'll show me how that particular search term sits and amongst all different MeSH categories. Anything above the word for the term, I will not capture in my searches, but I will capture anything below it. If I use the key term iron, I will capture anything that falls under iron isotopes or iron radio isotopes, but I will not capture other heavy metals or other inorganic chemical elements. It's just also good to know that this term in particular is a key term. Sometimes when we put a term in the search box, it doesn't come up with anything, but it will give us some suggestions for other terms that we might want to use. In fact, in my search, I can go to the See All Those section and think about adding ferritin, ferrous compounds, or transferrin because I know that these are ways that iron is measured in the body. Let's try another search term. Athlete. Now I see that athlete itself is not a search term or keyword, but athletes is, and female athlete triad syndrome and some of these other examples are where it shows up. If I click on athletes, I'll also get other similar terms. This also helps me know that if I use the term athletes, it's going to encompass para-athletes. It might also help me see how other key terms that I might want to use, such as college athlete, elite athlete, or professional athlete. So you can use this mesh database to help build out your key terms. What do you do if your search terms are not working well? Once you have defined that searchable question and you give it a try, maybe it doesn't give you the results, any results. Maybe it doesn't give you the results that really seem to match your research question. There are several different things that you can do to try to improve your results. First, just check your spelling to make sure that those key terms are correctly spelled. Then make sure you use the mesh database and using the video that we just watched because often terms that we think are going to be key terms are in fact not the key terms or in the language that these research databases recognize. If you've done those things, then perhaps ask an OSU librarian or use the free services that they have to help you identify what key terms would be. I put a link here in the slide deck for the health sciences librarians who offer opportunities for you to contact them by email or also to set an appointment. And students who have used this process in the past report being helped dramatically. So try not to suffer too long if you're feeling stuck and reach out to an OSU librarian. If your search is actually providing you with a lot of articles that you know you'll never be able to figure out which ones are the best, you might try using Boolean logic to help narrow down your search. By using the term and and linking several key terms together, it will identify articles that don't just include one key term but include all the key terms that you're searching for. And I put a couple examples here on how I can combine things to say iron and athlete or iron and athlete and supplement. Another way that you can use Boolean logic is to use the term or and this helps you broaden searches. So for example, you might say dementia or Alzheimer's because either way it's going to pull up an article that pertains to your topic. Or I might say iron and athlete or runner. Right. And that's going to give me articles that include iron and athlete or iron and runner. There are some other ways that you might refine your searches. And I put a link here to another resource about searching that will help you with searching your statements or searching your research statements. This goes into more detail about how to do searches and it'll outline certain things like considering a concept map or considering developing a table to organize your ideas. So once you feel like you have those key terms that you want to use, let's talk a little bit more about how we perform the actual actual search. Here are some tips and tricks for performing it. First, there are a number of research databases available for students to find research articles. There are too many actually to list on this slide. So I'm providing a link that goes to the Health Sciences Library that will show you all the different databases that tend to have articles related to health in them. From that library under top resources, click on the Health Sciences databases and or under journals, databases and more, click on databases. Either way, you'll get to the right page. You can choose to search more than one database or just one database. This project and this class doesn't require you to have a comprehensive lit review. So it's probably sufficient just to just to search one database like PubMed. You can also click on find articles from the nursing subject guide. You can browse the database list from A to Z or you can filter results in the search bar. And each database will include a brief description and a scope of its database. You can also search directly for databases from the Health Sciences Library homepage using the database filter in the top right hand corner. In other words, there are a lot of ways to get to the research database so that you can start to perform your search. Once you're in the database, you're going to adjust some filters and and put in those key terms or maybe use quotation marks around any phrases so that the phrases search together rather than separate words. So, for example, if you are trying to search for articles with the word common cold, you might put common cold in quotation marks. Otherwise, it's going to pull articles that are that have both the term common and cold in them. I'm going to show you another video that helps visualize how the search goes. We'll use our key terms to do a search. I'm going to do my search in a single research database for now using PubMed. I'm going to put in my search terms, iron and athletes, since I've already identified those as key terms. And then I simply click on the search bar. I got 132 results. That's a lot. And I'm probably not going to have time to look at 132 for this project. One very important way to narrow down the research is to change the timeline of the publication date. In nutrition science and exercise science, we're often looking at information from the last five years, maybe the last 10 years. Sometimes there's a seminal article that might have been published much earlier than that, and that's OK. But for this assignment, really think about more of the recent literature. Now my results are down to 65 just by including the last seven years. That cuts it in half. I'm happy with that. But there are some other ways that I can continue to narrow down the searching. You can see here that I'm only including randomized control trials. If I were to uncheck that, it would give me all kinds of research that fit these key terms and these publication dates. But I really want those randomized control trials because they're some of the strongest types of research that are conducted. So, I think that the meta-analyses and systematic reviews and reviews are going to be tough because they're going to be hard to summarize in this assignment. So, look for randomized control trials or clinical trials or epidemiological trials like COBORG studies. This is another way in which you can narrow it down by publication date. And there are some other ways, too, that you can narrow it down. Now, if you can't see these filters when you first go on PubMed, you just click on this additional filters button and it will take you to the different sections. Here's the one for article type. Here's the one for species. I'm going to click human. Here's the one for article languages. I'm going to select English. Yeah, perhaps I am only interested in female athletes for iron supplementation at this time. So, I'm going to keep that as female. And then I want to look at adults and adolescents. All right. So, 65 results. And so, what I'm going to do now is just take a look and see how these search results may help me with my project as I intended. I'm going to look through and notice the key terms that they're using and look at the abstract to see if it's a fairly good fit for my project. But even by some of these titles, I can start to rule out ones that I'm not going to use. For example, I don't really need to study on the methodological approach of iron and muscular damage. I'm really most interested in iron supplementation, effective iron supplementation in female athletes. And in this one, it talks about using bovine colostrum on iron homeostasis, which again, isn't really the same as an iron supplement. And this third one, this is getting a little bit closer. Talking about the effect of using a probiotic or a supplement to assist with iron status. So, maybe I am interested in that and I'll click it to read a little bit more about it. The abstract will tell me if it's close to my target audience and what they studied. This might be a good one, yeah, to include. So, if I need to find this article then, I can go a couple of different places. I'm going to access the full text using these full text links. Or another way to do this is to copy the DOI. So, I'm going to copy this DOI. And let's say this full text weren't there. I can then go to the library, OSU library system, and I'm going to put the DOI in the search box on the main page. And then Ohio State Library is going to do the work for me to find the full text article. Often it is not enough to read the abstract of an article. There are things that you will read as an independent consumer and the full article that are well represented in the abstract. And a lot of times you need more details than what's in the abstract. So, finding the actual research article is a very critical step. There are other ways you can go about finding the articles if you don't have one of the DOI numbers. And I posted a resource for doing that in the other part of this PowerPoint presentation. When you're reviewing your results, sources should always be evaluated relative to your purpose. Relevant sources are those that pertain to your research question. You should be able to determine pretty quickly if that article meets your information needs. For help with finding the full text article, use the tips provided in the video that we just watched. Or use this link to go to another resource that will provide even more tips. As you're reviewing each of the results, identify the structure of the article. What type of study was it? Skin the article for relevance. What's the purpose? Who's the intended audience? And then look for keywords related to your research. See how those match up. And then distinguish the main points of the article. What did they study? Why did they study it? What did the researchers find? Does the information seem credible? Does the source contain opinions or facts? Take time to reflect on what you've read and draw your own conclusions. In this project, we really want to hear from you about how you feel the information can be used in practice. You might be asking yourself now, why can't I just use artificial intelligence to do a lit search? Well, actually, you could if you wanted to. The university has an agreement with Microsoft, right? So copilot would be the preferred source of AI in which to search. And even though you can use this resource, it definitely has some risks involved. And I wanted to cover those today as well as give you some ideas about what the AI can do and what you should be doing using the AI. So when you think about the quality of the information that you get, these AI tools are still under development. And even though they've come a long way, there are still a lot of inaccuracies that can surface. So when you put in your prompt and you get some results, you want to make sure that there truly is an article with that title. You want to link to that article, right? Go find the original source and read it for yourself. Sometimes AI doesn't get the reference correct or the citation correct. And sometimes it misrepresents the article information and its response. So it might be a good way to try to identify articles or where articles are located or how to again, like, think about your particular topic. But it's not going to be able to do all of the work for you. Think of it as a supplementary tool that can help streamline and optimize the research process. But you need to be the one who's still putting in that critical quality check, the human analysis and evaluation and interpretation. Using tools like this might help save time, but you really need to make sure that it's not impinging on the accuracy, reliability and credibility of the end product. Finally, let's talk about APA citation style. It might seem a little silly or maybe too disciplined to think that there has to be a specific citation style for articles. But what this does is it helps us stay organized with our literature searches. And again, it's like kind of like learning its own language of understanding. How do we display an article or how do we give credit for an article? If we have a standard citation style, then we understand where we can find our sources and citations, whether it's alphabetically or how they appear in the article or some other style organization. The APA citation style lists lists each entry, starting with the last name of the first author. All authors are included using their last name, comma, first initial, period, until all of them are listed. After the authors, you list the year in parentheses, the year that it was published, followed by the title. Followed by the volume, which in this case is volume 12. The number, which is issue five, and then the page. Sometimes you'll see ranges for pages and sometimes you'll just see the starting page. It's also become usual practice to include the DOI reference for the article itself. So please use APA citation style. There are several links in this module that will take you to a guide that will give you the same information. But if you pattern your entries off of this example, then you'll get credit for this part of the assignment. I hope you enjoy finding literature articles this week, learning something new, reflecting on how you can put it into practice or use it in practice. Because eventually in a couple of weeks, you're going to start to develop this project into a presentation to share it with others.
