 Well, let's talk about sleep and appetite. The National Sleep Foundation recommends a sleep duration of 7 to 9 hours per night for adults. Accurate estimates of sleep duration are difficult to achieve at the population level as they are mainly derived from questionnaires asking about typical sleep duration in the week vs weekends or work nights and free nights, or sometimes average sleep in 24 hours including naps. In the US, current estimates are consistent with other areas around the globe in which 36% of adults age 20 or older sleep for 6 hours or less on weekdays or on workdays. What effect does this have on our weight or our nutrition? In the assigned reading for this week, the meta-analysis from Fatima found an association but could not determine a cause between obesity and poor sleep. However, there is a large body of research that shows that extra weight increases a person's risk for sleep complications like sleep apnea. We also know that sleep deprivation can lead to weight gain, and poor sleep habits can make it hard to lose weight. Let's take a little deeper dive into the mechanisms behind these associations' causes. We have several appetite hormones that really determine how much we want to eat and when we want to eat it. Some of those major appetite hormones are highlighted here in red. Leptin is a hormone that decreases appetite. It's produced by our fat cells. So leptin levels are lower when you're thin and higher when you have extra fat. Many people with obesity have built up resistance to leptin, meaning that they might release large amounts of leptin but the body doesn't respond to it. Researchers have targeted leptin regulation to prevent or treat obesity, but they have not been successful at lowering it long-term. Short-term fasting results in a fast, significant decline in leptin. Thus, your appetite grows. That's a survival mechanism that's been around since human beings have been around. When we eat, leptin levels begin to rise again and return to normal. Another important appetite hormone is ghrelin. Ghrelin increases appetite and is released primarily in the stomach and the intestines. Ghrelin levels increase before meals and are thought to signal hunger to the brain to let us know that we should stop eating or we might be getting full. Even though it's not pictured here in the image, I also want to talk about glucagon-like peptide or GLP-1. This is a hormone that helps determine when someone feels full. GLP is released by the gut after eating. It helps the body produce insulin and regulates blood glucose levels. A recent class of medications called GLP-1 agonists are a class of drugs that help treat type 2 diabetes and obesity. Maybe you know someone taking a GLP-1 or you've considered taking it yourself or are taking it yourself. These medications mimic the actions of GLP-1 hormone. The drugs include semiglutide, otherwise known as a Zempic, Victosa, Rivalsis, Zepbound, and Wigovi, among others. People taking these medications report decreased appetite and oftentimes a disinterest in eating, which is new to them and has its own set of complications or considerations. But when it comes to regulating appetite hormones, it's been the most effective class of drugs to really long-term affect a person's appetite. We also have a couple other appetite hormones called cholecystokinin, CCK, which reacts from the amount of fat that you eat, and peptide YY or PYY, which reacts to the proteins that you eat. Often, we know that protein can be advantageous for improving appetite regulation as well, with high levels of protein suppressing appetite hormones. We also know that eating a small to moderate amount of fat creates a stronger level of fullness or an increased satiety with meals. There are other hormones that aren't appetite hormones, but are endocrine hormones that have effects on appetite as well. I mentioned on the last slide the interaction between GLP-1 and insulin. Insulin can have both an increase and decreased effect on appetite, depending on how it's released and where it's acting in the body. Insulin releases from endogenous stores, endogenous just meaning inside the body, and that type is associated with fullness. Its job is to help clear the glucose that has been consumed in the meal through the carbohydrate foods that we eat. They get digested, and then that glucose gets absorbed into the blood. High blood glucose is dangerous, as it causes a thickening of the blood. The blood does not flow through capillaries easily, and therefore you have damage to the kidneys, the eyes, the nerves in the feet, and other organ systems. Insulin is really important for regulation of blood glucose. That's why some individuals have to take exogenous sources of insulin. Insulin that comes from exogenous or outside sources, such as in the form of medication, and increase appetite. Estrogen is another hormone that affects appetite. It reduces food intake in humans as well as animals. During menstrual cycles, women tend to eat at the least when estrogen levels are the highest. Usually, this occurs sometime around ovulation. Estrogen may also suppress ghrelin and increase CCK, assisting with appetite regulation. Women are producing estrogen a majority of their life up until the point of menopause, when estrogen levels have dropped so much that we see major life changes, including a shift in how women carry weight. Women who are premenopausal or in menopause tend to have a shift of body fat to the central region of the body, away from the thighs and hips. This also comes with increased risk of chronic diseases. Estrogen has a protective effect on appetite regulation. Another really popular hormone to talk about when it comes to weight is cortisol. Although, the science really has mixed results and some of the associations or mechanisms for how cortisol increases weight are not always seen in the literature. What that mechanism is, though, is that cortisol is elevated during times when we have sleep deprivation. That cortisol is a stress hormone associated with fight or flight, or if you look at it over the chronic or long term, it is a stress hormone that causes a small amount of inflammation in the body. Your body is just reacting to the fact that you're sleep deprived. It's realizing that you might be more groggy or fatigued and releasing more cortisol may stimulate the body to keep you more alert. Why is this a problem? Well, in some studies, cortisol has been shown to increase appetite, especially for fat, sweet and salty foods. So not only does it make us want to eat more, but it also makes us want to eat different types of foods that are associated with higher energy density. This cortisol may also slow down metabolism and cause insulin resistance. High levels of cortisol cause decreases in testosterone, which can also lead to a decrease in muscle mass and may also cause your body to store fat as you cope with stress. So there's a lot of different mechanisms at play with cortisol, some of which may be present in many people and others that might be more dependent upon like a person's genetics or a person's gut microbiome or some kind of interaction that we don't yet clearly understand. So how does sleep deprivation affect appetite hormones? We've talked about some of these associations already, but I want to point out that people who don't get enough sleep may have a less healthy diet overall and may crave energy dense foods. And maybe you can relate to this. Maybe you see changes in what you like to eat on days in which you feel sleep deprived. It may also impact your motivation to make foods or to make healthier types of foods. And sometimes during sleep deprivation, we just take an easy way out and eat out or order out, which also changes the energy density of foods typically. In a study published in 2023, scientists looked at the effect of acute total sleep deprivation on appetite hormones. Participants were about 25 years old. They're both men and women. And the study used a crossover design in which they looked at appetite hormones in the blood after one night of sleep deprivation and one night of normal rest in a laboratory. Note here that there was never a night when participants were sleeping at their home as they usually would. But after sleep deprivation, fasting levels of leptin were lower and graylin was higher. The changes in leptin following sleep loss were more pronounced among women and stronger among those with obesity. So these results remain true over extended periods of sleep loss, weight gain would easily take place, especially in women. We don't have a study that shows us how these levels might continue to be changed with sleep deprivation for longer than a couple of days. However, the mechanism is clear. So sleep and dietary intake or quality are definitely interrelated. The quality and timing of dietary intake at night may delay or shorten sleep duration. This is particularly true in studies of adolescents where this delayed sleep may influence breakfast timing and quality and skipping breakfast is associated with lower dietary quality in adolescents. In other words, they're staying up late and therefore wanting to sleep in. And if they don't sleep in, they're getting a short sleep cycle. If they do sleep in, they run out of time to have a nutritious breakfast. Another thing to consider here with sleep deprivation is the food cravings. Food cravings are just an intense desire to consume a particular food item that have been demonstrated as an important predictor for weight gain in adults. Cravings may be impacted by sleep and in turn influence dietary intake and dietary quality. In a recent experimental study of adults, less sleep was related to taste and wanting for high fat and sweet foods. Age is an important factor when considering cravings as cross-sectional evidence in young adolescents and adults ages 6 to 23 years found that with increasing age, there are less frequent food cravings. Overall, regardless of age, the less sleep, the more sugar and lower fiber and fruits and vegetables in the diet. Multiple randomized controlled trials have investigated the impact of short-term sleep restriction on energy intake and show short sleep duration of four to five hours results in increased energy intake of about 385 calories per day. Often these studies are done in a lab and not necessarily on free living humans. There is a strength to that and that everything else is controlled for all the different environmental factors that could be influencing that calorie increase are controlled for. But it's always interesting to note, right, that there are issues with generalizing findings to free living humans when we haven't necessarily studied them and their full element. So sleep is important for weight loss. Sleep timing is emerging as a key predictor of risk of morbidity and with later bedtimes and greater variability in sleep midpoint and irregular sleep durations, all of these things have been linked with increased biomarkers of cardiometabolic disease risk and adiposity. Sleep extension interventions and short sleepers may help reduce intake of sugars and overall energy intake. And we also know that poor sleep quality, night shift work patterns and social jet lag are associated with lower diet quality. I think the shift workers are particularly vulnerable to short sleep or disrupted sleep. The chronic disruption to the physiological body clock or circadian rhythms in addition to shorter sleep duration and poor sleep quality can be linked to higher energy intakes in this particular population. Social jet lag is a less severe form of chronic disruption. It manifests as an earlier sleep midpoint during working days compared with free days, which are usually the weekends. In other words, people don't sleep a lot during the work week or they do sleep a lot during the work week and then they don't on the weekend. It is also important to consider sleep quality with social jet lag, a term that encompasses frequency of awakenings, time taken to get to sleep and time spent awake as a proportion of time spent in bed, which is called sleep efficiency. Sleep is essential for regulating hormones that control hunger and appetite. But I also wanted to mention that it also maintains homeostasis of regions in the brain associated with rewards. So studies have shown that people who get enough sleep have a lower risk of obesity and are more likely to lose weight successfully. So this evidence would suggest that adding sleep advice into weight management interventions may be more effective than energy restricted diets. What if we had weight management interventions that focused so much more on sleep and sleep hygiene and improving sleep quality and talked less about the need to decrease our diet by 300 or 400 or 500 or 1000 calories a day? So we had a whole lecture from Dr. Swain on how exercise can lead to better sleep. But let's talk about it from the nutrition point of view. One key element is to not go to bed hungry. You also don't want to go to bed on a really full stomach, but avoiding going to bed hungry is known to get a better night's sleep. When you're hungry, the body can't focus on relaxing and the instincts to want to feed the body kick in and override those sleep signals. You want to avoid or limit caffeine, nicotine and alcohol within four to six hours of bedtime. Caffeine consumed even six hours before bed can make it difficult to fall asleep because it blocks the hormone adenosine, which promotes sleepiness. And alcohol disrupts sleep quality. Although the sedative effects of alcohol can initially make it easier to fall asleep, it disrupts sleep patterns by shortening the amount of REM or rapid eye movement, which is sleep in the first part of the night and leads to more night awakenings. This graphic from the National Sleep Foundation helps us answer that question of, hmm, will a small amount of alcohol affect my sleep? How much alcohol you drink and when you drink it can both influence sleep. As you consume alcohol, it's rapidly absorbed into your bloodstream where it remains until your liver is able to metabolize it, typically at the rate of about one drink per hour. If you have alcohol in your bloodstream when you go to sleep, you are likely to experience alterations in sleep architecture, or that is how your body cycles through the four stages of sleep. The typical sleep cycle begins with three non-rapid eye movement stages of sleep and ends with rapid eye movement, or REM, during the fourth stage. During sleep, the body cycles through all of these stages every 90 to 120 minutes, with the non-REM sleep dominating the first part of the night and REM increasing during the second part of the night. Each stage is necessary for sleep to feel refreshing and for vital processes like learning and memory consolidation to occur. So when you go to bed with alcohol in your system, you're likely to experience more non-REM sleep and less REM sleep than usual, at least initially. Later in the night, once your body has metabolized the alcohol, you're likely to experience a rise in the REM sleep, the lightest, or sorry, you're likely to experience a rise in the lightest stage of sleep. And this can lead to frequent wakings and fragmented low quality sleep. And as you can see from this graphic, even low amounts of alcohol decrease sleep quality, and that increases as the number of drinks go up. We also know from a small amount of research that saturated fats, the kind that come from burgers and fried foods, may lead to less slow-wave sleep. And we really want that slow-wave sleep. That's our quality sleep. So let's think about how we can use foods that promote sleep as part of our sleep regimen. Researchers at the University of Michigan, sorry y'all, have followed more than a thousand young adults ages 21 to 30 who were enrolled in a web-based dietary intervention study designed to help them increase fruits and vegetables. In that study, they found that those who increased their fruit and vegetable consumption over a three month period reported better sleep quality and reductions in insomnia symptoms. Overall diet quality matters, but let's focus in on some specifics here. Dairy foods, tart cherries, and berries contain melatonin, and melatonin is sleep-supporting. It's a hormone that we need to in order to have, in order to get to sleep and promote better sleep quality. Tart cherry juice in particular, which is if you get the 100% fruit juice of the juice of the sour cherries, can reduce muscle soreness and boost your immune system, and it may also help you sleep better. Eating about 8 ounces one hour before bed seems to provide the benefit that you might be looking for. There are also capsules, which can be riskier because they're a dietary supplement and they're often unregulated. If you want to consider taking a dietary supplement instead of using the whole food source, talk to your dietitian. Poor rich foods also trigger the release of an important hormone of serotonin, so that can help with sleep. And protein rich foods contain high levels of tryptophan, which eventually trigger a turn in, you know, help with the production of melatonin. Potassium and magnesium you can also do as supplements, but are safer to get from food sources. These foods help the muscles relax. Electrolyte drinks and supplements have their place, but the food you eat should be the foundation, in part because it's hard to overdo any single nutrient and food form. Foods rarely contain toxic doses of vitamins and minerals, and you don't have to worry about balancing out your electrolytes when you're eating foods. You can chomp away on electrolyte rich foods without fear and using bananas, avocados, potatoes, pumpkin seeds, sweet potatoes, yogurt, and dark leafy greens are all good choices for increasing potassium and magnesium in your diet. There's also been research to show that herbal teas like chamomile and mint are considered sleep inducing. So here are some examples of some late night snacks that will help promote sleep. On the left, we have yogurt with the tart cherries and a sprinkling of pumpkin seeds on top. This provides the production of melatonin, right, that is supportive of sleep. In the middle, we have roasted chickpeas, which you can flavor with a variety of different spices or seasonings. Toss a can, empty a can out, rinse them, pat them dry, season them, and then put them in the air fryer for just a short period of time. They toast up nice and crispy. Chickpeas contain both protein and fiber, which we know to be supportive of sleep. And on the right hand side, we have our potassium and magnesium rich banana with some magnesium rich almond butter on top. Here's to many, many future nights of excellent sleep.
