 Welcome back to Movement is Medicine. I'm your instructor, Dr. Carmen Twain. Fat but fit. It's a paradox for sure. Today we're going to investigate what the science has to show about what we know and what we don't know. So what do we know about this notion of fat but fit? What does the science show us? Well in the late 1980s there were some esteemed authors known as Blair, Cole, and Paffenberger who published a study that demonstrated individuals with low cardiorespiratory fitness, those who are in the bottom 20th percentile, those guys had the highest risk of mortality eight years later when compared to those who are at least moderately fit. Since that time many longitudinal studies have consistently confirmed this notion that males and females as well as healthy and diseased individuals for all cause mortality as well as cardiovascular disease mortality have this risk that is an increased risk of death for those with the lowest levels of fitness. Fat but fit paradox. What is a paradox anyway? It's a seemingly absurd or self-contradictory statement that when investigated may prove well to be true. What we know obesity is related to multiple physical and mental comorbidities and it is a non-deniable risk factor for all cause mortality and cardiovascular disease mortality. It has been suggested however that being fit might attenuate some of the adverse consequences of obesity. In this context in the late 1990s some studies provided the first evidence for what was later known as the fat but fit paradox. These studies demonstrated that all cause cardiovascular disease mortality risk in obese individuals as defined by body mass index, body fat percentage, or waist circumference who are fit is not significantly different from their normal weight and fit counterparts. The science shows us that also being an ideal or quote-unquote normal weight might not be enough. Being fit plays a major role in health. There's a general belief that being an ideal or normal weight is synonymous to being healthy. Yet this notion could be wrong. In many cases a normal weight but unfit individual could have significantly higher risk of all cause and cardiovascular disease mortality than a normal weight fit individual. In addition some will find even more interesting the fact that several studies have reported that ideal or normal weight individuals who are unfit could be at higher risk than obese but fit individuals which may seem paradoxical. Let's look a bit closer at what the science has to show us. Shown here you see a graphical representation of research that shows us the results from multiple studies. Let's walk through this together. What are we looking at here? If we look at the top picture we see that in figure A we're looking at men. We're looking at a lot of men. You can see that we're looking at an n of 25,000 over 25,000 individuals. If we look at figure B it's over 21,000 individuals and figure C over 14,000 individuals. What specifically are we investigating? We're looking at a hazard ratio, a risk of cardiovascular death. Okay we can see that that's the same on each one of these axis for A, B and C and we can see that on the other axis we're looking at males who are either normal weight versus obese. We can see that the data is further stratified by being fit being a blue dot versus being unfit a red triangle. What do we notice in figure A? We notice those that are normal weight have a lower hazard ratio, a lower risk of cardiovascular death than those who are obese. We also notice though that regardless of whether you are normal weight or obese your risk of cardiovascular death is much much lower if you are fit compared to if you are unfit. We see that findings in figure B and C very much mimic the findings in figure A. That is when we look at males according to their body fat percentage we see the same findings or according to waist group we see that fit individuals have a very low all cause death ratio compared to those who are unfit and it doesn't matter if they are low body weight or low waist circumference group or the high waist circumference group. If we look at the bottom graphs D, E and F which examine women and a lot of women over 3,000 women in figure D, 11,000 women in figure E and over 11,000 in figure F we see very similar findings. That is there is an increased risk despite your weight if you are unfit in each one of the categorizations. So the takeaway message is that despite being overweight not just overweight obese you can greatly reduce your risk of all-cause mortality or cardiovascular disease mortality by being fit. What is the impact of our genes versus the impact of our lifestyle? As for many phenotypes our genes and our environment jointly influence both adiposity and our cardio-respiratory fitness. We know that the heritability of both obesity and cardio-respiratory fitness might be up to about 50%. When we examine the heritage family study led by Professor Bouchard and his colleagues we examined environmental factors that are used to explain the rest of that variance. Most impressive amongst environmental factors regular physical activity and particularly that of vigorous intensity has been shown to be the most effective in improving cardio-respiratory fitness. That is we have the power to override our genes by using physical activity as a tool. Let's examine what we still don't know. There is emerging evidence suggesting that moderate to high cardio-respiratory fitness might counteract the negative consequences of obesity on many other health outcomes especially in certain population age groups such as children and adolescents. The fat but fit paradox in children and adolescents. Recent meta-analysis have demonstrated a strong link between cardio-respiratory fitness and cardio metabolic risk factors in children and adolescents providing cut points that more accurately delineate the cardiovascular disease risk. Worldwide reference values that are sex specific and age specific for cardio-respiratory fitness have been published. These two meta-analysis have major practical implications as they allow children's cardio-respiratory fitness levels to be properly interpreted and ranked. Specific information about the fat but fit paradox in the young population is scarce but there is evidence suggesting that having a moderate to high levels of cardio-respiratory fitness may help to attenuate the deleterious effects of metabolic consequences that is ascribed to an excess of total and central adiposity. Research has shown that fat but fit individuals have a 50% reduction in the risk of developing depression compared to their fat and unfit peers. It is very likely that fitness and fatness counteract in their association with many physical and mental health outcomes. You should take note that all the evidence available for the fat but fit paradox comes from observational studies. Consequently, even if most of the studies are prospective cohorts and their findings provide highly valuable prognostic information, that is you're able to make prediction based on certain characteristics, the cause-and-effect relationship cannot be confirmed. Although exercise interventions in obese individuals lowered cardiovascular disease risk even without weight loss, literature is limited regarding whether these improvements in health without weight loss are driven by increases in cardio-respiratory fitness. In other words, studies of the fat but fit paradox need to be carried out using an experimental design. Future exercise-based randomized controlled trials conducted in obese populations should therefore include an accurate assessment of cardio-respiratory fitness before and after intervention so that formal intervention analysis can be performed. Let's weigh some of the take-home messages. Obesity and especially severe morbid obesity, those who have a body mass index greater than 35. This is a major public health problem. Lifestyle intervention programs for obesity with a special focus on exercise and a healthy diet are important public health goals. However, focus should not be placed exclusively on losing weight and fat but also on increasing cardio-respiratory fitness. Since a medium to high cardio-respiratory fitness level may help attenuate the adverse consequences of obesity on health. Ideally, future public health strategies planned for obese individuals should target in parallel both weight and fat reduction and cardio-respiratory fitness improvement. This strategy is especially important if the obese person is classified as unfit. We can utilize practical information to identify those who are at risk. You can see in the table shown here that VO2, the gold standard of aerobic fitness, has been identified for treadmill versus bike tests for various age groups. This data can help sports specialists, physicians, and other healthcare practitioners and even you to classify individuals, yourself, or loved ones. These cut points may be useful in identifying those who are particularly at risk as unfit. When combined together with the internationally accepted definition of obesity, that is a BMI of greater than or equal to 30, this can result in identification of a particularly vulnerable population, those who are underfit and over fat. Which don't we have a moral obligation to try to affect change here? The science may not be complete, but it is clear on this point. There is a high predictability between low fitness and over fatness and death. Let us make sure that we do something about that. If not professionally, we can start on a personal level with ourselves and those who we care most about. Significant and meaningful change has to start somewhere. you
