 Are you sitting there listening to this thinking you would like to exercise someday, maybe tomorrow, if only you had a little bit more time, the energy, the money to join a new life, someone to exercise with, cuter clothes, better legs, not so many aches and pains. Maybe this is you. Maybe this isn't you. But even if it's not you, you probably do know someone who says these types of things. Here's the bad news. Those are all excuses. And excuses are no excuse. They are little self-imposed boundaries or limitations that people hide behind. They're obstacles in our way. It's just our way of telling ourselves no. Here's the good news. Those were all excuses. And you can walk right by them on your way to better health and freedom from self-imposed ideas that degrade your quality of life. Let's learn more about it. I'm your instructor, Dr. Carmen Swain, who today is going to devote her time to talking the talk and walking the walk, to wellness that is. Let's find out what the science has to show about walking. Walking may seem more like a leisurely mode of transportation than formal exercise, but it absolutely counts. If you think about all of the fitness activities, like a pyramid, walking is the foundation. It's what we've done since the beginning of time. And we should not discount its benefits. A stroll offers a surprising number of health perks. In a recent study of people who spent much of their day sitting, those who took breaks by standing or walking, even for just short bouts, had trimmer wastes, lower body mass index scores, and better measures on heart disease and diabetes risk than those who did not take those breaks. We've previously learned that breaking up sedentary periods as frequently as you can is really important. And walking is usually the easiest way to do that. Even if it's just for a few minutes, it really makes a difference. Think of a medical condition. Go ahead, pick one. And guess what? Walking is probably good for preventing it. Walking can even pack the same powerful effects as much tougher types of exercise like running. One study examining walking versus running found that brisk walking can lower your risk for high blood pressure, high cholesterol, and diabetes just as much as running can. The results of this study showed that equivalent energy expenditures produce similar results in disease risk. So if you want to run to get the effect of reducing your risk, that's fine. But you can do the same thing by walking. It just takes a little bit more time. Walking can lower your risk for disease, even if that disease is cancer. In the most common cancer in the United States, breast cancer, research has found that exercise can seriously influence your risk of dying from this disease. In a study from the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, over 79,000 women, all of whom were runners or walkers, were followed for 11 years. None of these women had been diagnosed with breast cancer at the start of the study. And they all reported their distances for how far they ran or walked each week. Researchers found that women who met the current aerobic exercise guidelines, that's 2 and 1-1-2 hours of moderate activity or an hour and 15 minutes of vigorous activity a week, were 42% less likely to die of breast cancer during the study than those whose exercise fell short of the guidelines. This is even after adjusting for body mass index. So what's the secret? How does walking lower your risk of cancer? Only recently have we come to understand exercise reduces estrogen's effect on cancer by altering how the body breaks down the hormone into either harmful or benign byproducts. And also, while the current study controlled for BMI, another way exercise works in our favor is that it reduces women's levels of fatty tissue, which secretes estrogen and is the main source of the hormone in post-menopausal women. But you may be wondering, how does aerobic exercise affect estrogen levels in young women who are at high risk for breast cancer? The study shown here examines that question. Why is this study so important? Because for young women who are at high risk of breast cancer, often recommended practices are removing your ovaries or taking high risk reducing medications such as tamoxifen, which have been shown to reduce breast cancer risk. However, both are associated with short-term and long-term side effects. Aerobic exercise does not have negative long-term consequences. And it's an accessible activity for almost all people. So understanding if exercise can also lower estrogen levels is the first step in determining whether or not it can be used to reduce breast cancer in young women who are at high risk. And results of the study reveal that premenopausal women who are at high risk for breast cancer who participated in regular aerobic exercise for at least five months indeed have lower estrogen levels than women who do not exercise regularly. Can walking help you live a longer life? If your goal is longevity, walking may be the very best exercise. Walking is good for everyone, and especially beginners or novice exercisers. Those with orthopedic issues or those who are overweight, walking may ultimately be better than running or other strenuous forms of physical activity because it doesn't cause bodily wear and tear. Another reason that walking rules is that walking has the lowest quit rate of any type of exercise. And don't despair. Don't give up that walk just because you can't fit in the recommended 30 minutes of daily exercise. Growing evidence suggests that even half that much can help. This is no excuse to slack off. Regular exercise strengthens muscles, reduces the risks of diseases, and promotes mental well-being. The more exercise, the better. But not everyone has the time or the willpower. So researchers have set out to find the minimum amount of physical activity needed to reap health benefits. This study from Taiwan suggested that 15 minutes of moderate exercise a day can lead to a longer life. What I love about this research finding is that this could convince many individuals that they are able to incorporate physical activity into their busy lives. This study took place in Taiwan. And the researchers noted that East Asians, including China, Japan, and Taiwan, are generally less physically active than Western counterparts. And their workouts tend to be less intense. In this study, over 400,000 Taiwanese adults were asked, how much exercise did you do in the previous month? Based on their answers, they were put into five groups of varying activity levels, from inactive to highly active. Researchers kept track of their progress for eight years and, on average, calculated their projected life expectancy. The study found those who exercise just 15 minutes a day or 90 minutes a week cut the risk of mortality by 14% and extended their life expectancy by three years. Researchers also noted that each additional 15 minutes of exercise further reduced the risk of death. Sure, there's some limitations here. Answers were self-reported. The study, though very large, was observational, which means the health benefits could be not entirely due to exercise. But researchers did say they took into account factors that might affect health, such as smoking and drinking. And outside scientists agree. They say the findings found here are in line with other research studies. And that's very, very good news. For the sedentary or underfit, the key is this. Some exercise is better than none. While the physical benefits of walking are notable, the mental boost that can be gleaned from adding a walk to your daily routine may be more immediate. One Stanford University study found that walking increased creative output by an average of 60%. Researchers labeled this type of creativity divergent thinking. This is a thought process used to generate creative ideas by exploring many possible solutions. When one goes for a walk, you open up the opportunity for free flow of ideas. Walking is a simple and robust solution to increasing creativity and physical activity. In this study, psychologists also found that a 10-minute walk may be just as good as a 45-minute workout when it comes to reducing the symptoms of anxiety. All of this tends to make sense. We know previous science has shown that engaging in activities that allow our minds to wander, this promotes a mental state that's conducive to innovative ideas and aha moments. But it's not only your creativity that will benefit from this mental lift. The act of walking is also a proven mood booster. One study found that 12 minutes of walking resulted in an increase in joviality, vigor, attentiveness, and self-confidence versus the same time spent sitting. Walking in nature specifically was found to reduce ruminating over negative experiences, which increases activity in the brain associated with negative emotions and raises the risk of depression. Wow. So to wrap this up, if I go for a short walk, I can feel better about myself, have higher self-confidence, not think about bad things so much. Be more creative in my thoughts, have a better outlook on life, not be anxious, and overall just feel happier just from a 10-minute walk. I don't know about you, but it's pretty clear what I have in my plan for today. If you start a walking habit early in life, this ensures better mobility years down the line when you may need it. But even if you start in old age, it can keep you upright and on the go. One recent study found that older sedentary adults cut their risk of disability by a quarter by taking up light forms of exercise, including walking. Other research has showed that when a group of seniors took two walks a day, they became nearly 20% more mobile in their daily activities. It can also keep your aches away. In a study of older people with arthritis who walked 45 minutes a week, they were 80% more likely to maintain or even improve their physical functioning compared with those who didn't walk regularly. All of this science just builds upon previous scientific adage, that is Newton's first law of motion. A body in motion stays in motion. Have you ever heard the recommendation of getting 10,000 steps a day? Sometimes even if you buy a smartwatch like an Apple watch or a fitness tracker like a Fitbit, these devices may encourage you to take 10,000 steps a day. But do you really have to take that many steps to be healthy? Experts say that while 10,000 steps a day is a good number to reach, any amount of activity that is beyond what you're currently doing will likely benefit your health. The origins of 10,000 step recommendation isn't exactly scientific. The magic number 10,000 dates back to a marketing campaign conducted at about the time of the Tokyo Olympic Games. At that time, a Japanese company was introducing their new step counter called the Man-Poke. This translated into 10,000 steps meter. And they marketed their device with the slogan, let's walk 10,000 steps a day. Japanese walking clubs were fairly popular at that time. And the idea of a 10,000 step target seemed to have caught on because the slogan was catchy and people tended to like the nice round number. The rest, as they say, is history. Studies conducted since that time have suggested that people who increase their walking to 10,000 steps a day do experience health benefits. One study found that women who increase their step count to 10,000 steps a day reduce their blood pressure after 24 weeks of a walking program. Another study of overweight women found that walking 10,000 steps a day improved their glucose levels. Walking 10,000 steps a day is not an official recommendation from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Instead, this agency recommends adults engage in 150 minutes of moderate activity a week, such as brisk walking. To meet the CDC's recommendation, you need to walk about 7,000 to 8,000 steps a day. To put this into perspective, if you normally walk 5,000 steps a day, getting an extra 30 minute brisk walk in your day would take you to about 8,000 steps. The average U.S. adult walks about 5,900 steps a day. But there's no reason to stop there because we know that more is better. The Mayo Clinic recommends that people use step counters to set short-term goals, such as taking an extra 1,000 steps daily for one week. And then building up to a long-term goal, such as 10,000 steps per day. There's many ways to go about it, but the most important thing is to increase your activity beyond what you were doing before. Any amount of activity that you can do today that you didn't do yesterday is going to contribute to a happier and healthier you. So let's step to it. Thank you.
