 When you lift weights, physical changes happen to your body. Your body becomes toned up. You have more energy, even with less sleep. And you are far less stressed out. And you can even experience personal changes as you start to feel more confident in your body. But the average American doesn't really love strength training. Well, half of the American population does complete the recommended aerobic workout each week. Only 20% of Americans do recommended strength training that work major muscle groups to train and tone your body. So welcome back, everyone. I'm Dr. Carmen Suane, your instructor. And today we're going to dive into what the science has to show regarding the true power of strength training. The power of strength training. So few are doing it, yet the scientific benefits are stacked in its favor, from bone protection to disease prevention. And it appears to have special benefits for women. There are so many misconceptions about strength and resistance training. Women, not so long ago, women didn't think they had a place in strength and resistance training. It was thought that you'll become muscle bound and so bulky that your body would become rigid. But that myth has been debunked. And we see this in athletes who can hit the ball further, jump higher and run faster as a result of strength training. And gradually, very gradually, we started realizing that there are benefits with strength training beyond sports and women in particular, happen to be neglecting strength training at their own peril. Strength training is the only kind of exercise that makes muscles bigger. Bigger muscle is stronger muscle, which allows us to generate more force and move faster. We lose muscle as we age. Young people tend to take this for granted. The day to day parts of life that require strength, like walking upstairs and carrying a heavy bag of groceries. But a sedentary lifestyle means that people are gradually becoming weaker over time. A process that will start in your mid 20s, if you're not doing any strengthening exercise. And it will continue gradually until up about your fifth decade in life. And then you start to see a much faster decline. This decline in skeletal muscle is accompanied by an increase in body fat and termed sarcopenic obesity. Even if the diameter of the arm or the leg may stay the same with age, we can see by looking under the skin at a cross sectional area, as shown in the diagram here. And it's not hard to understand how this physiological process results in weakened and ultimately frailty. But we also know that building strength training and building muscle through resistance training can fight back against this process of sarcopenic obesity. And it's also one of the very few ways to make bones denser. A perk that is especially important to women. As a college student, you have likely already achieved your peak bone mass. And from here on out, you will likely lose more than you make. However, lifting something heavy, like a dumbbell, makes bones bear more weight. And in exercise, stressing your bones is a good thing. Our bones are constantly remodeling. Your body is constantly adding more calcium to bones and taking calcium away from your bones. This delicate balance starts to tip as people age and they lose more mineral from their bone than they're able to lay down. Over time, bone becomes less dense and more brittle and prone to osteoporosis. A condition that affects about 10 million Americans, 80% of which are female. Women have smaller, thinner bones than men from the start. And after menopause, they lose estrogen, a hormone that protects bones. But is there something that we can do about that? Progressive resistance training by non-athletic populations, including the elderly, is a relatively new practice. Historically, weightlifting or strength training has been limited to the young, athletic individuals seeking to improve performance as a component of a sports training program. As a result, strength training research has concentrated on this population. However, the benefits gained from resistance training, specifically improved muscle strength, agility and resilience, extend beyond the playing fields to the performance of daily activities. Over the past two decades, numerous studies have focused on bone and resistance training. In older populations, the effects of resistance training may make a difference in being able to climb stairs, carry groceries or rise from a chair. In addition, resistance training may have a significant impact in maintaining bone health. Recently, progressive resistance training principles have been applied to a large and growing population of older men and women for whom the relationship of muscle strength and balance is critical in maintaining functional independence and resisting falls and for decreasing factors associated with osteoporosis. Several studies have shown that resistance training can greatly increase physical strength in elderly people and may have a positive effect on bone. Wolf's Law states that stress or mechanical loading applied to the bone via muscle and tendons has a direct effect on bone formation and remodeling. In support of this, numerous studies have shown that male weightlifters have greater bone mineral density than non-athletes. The research completed to date indicates that resistance training is positively associated with high bone mineral density in both young and older adults and that the effect of resistive exercise is relatively site-specific to the working muscles and to the bones to which they attach. Although aerobic exercise and weight-bearing physical activity are important in maintaining overall health and healthy bone, resistance training exercise seems to have a more potent impact on bone density. The positive effect on bone has recently been demonstrated by a randomized controlled trials using high intensity resistance training protocols. It has been suggested that high intensity resistance training may help to achieve the highest possible peak bone mass in premenopausal women and may aid in maintaining or increasing bone in postmenopausal women. However, the question still remains, what type of resistance training is best? A research study by Maldonzo and Snow in 2000 examined this question in relation to elderly men and women. 24 elderly men and 18 elderly women participated in a 24-week study. The average age of the men was 54 years. The women were all postmenopausal and not on estrogen therapy. Their mean age was about 52 years. None of the participants had participated in an exercise or resistance training program for two years preceding the study. Baseline measurements were taken for bone mass, body composition, and insulin-like growth factor, IGF-1. This is a bone deposition favoring hormone. And also, one repetition maximum measures were taken. That is the maximum weight a participant could lift one time Then, participants were randomly assigned to either a high intensity or a moderate intensity resistance training program. The moderate intensity resistance training program was a seated, machine-based program. The participants in this group trained three times per week for about 75 minutes per supervised session. This group performed 13 exercises each session on weight machines. The exercises included things like leg extension, leg press, hamstring curls, arm curls, tricep press, chest press, et cetera. Exercise intensities ranged from 40 to 60% of a person's 1RM for three sets of 10 to 13 repetitions. This resistance training program resulted in significant increases in bone mineral density of the greater trochanter for both males and females. Moderate intensity resistance training also significantly increased lean mass, 3.4% for women and 1.9% for males. Peak force was improved and strength for the men as well as the women. However, there was no significant change in IGF-1 for either group. The lack of increase in IGF-1 indicates that the increases in bone mineral density was most likely a result of physical stress on the bone and not a hormonal effect. The high intensity resistance training groups also trained three times per week for about 75 minutes per supervised session. However, these participants used free weights in a functional standing program. This program involved 12 exercises, which included things like free weight back squat, deadlift, bicep curls, sit-ups, tricep extensions, chest press, incline chest press, shoulder press, et cetera. The exercise intensity was set as 70% of all men and the exercise intensity was set as 70% of one repetition maximum. Participants performed three sets of eight repetitions. One key difference of this resistance program was that it was periodized. There were two 12-week sessions separated by one transitional, that was non-resistance activities, to allow recovery from the high exercise intensity and to prevent injuries. The high intensity resistance exercise resulted in significant increases in bone mineral density of the greater trochanter for both males and females. However, only males achieved the added result of significant increase in lumbar spine mineral density. High intensity resistance training resulted in significant increases in lean mass, 8% for females and 3.2% for males. Also, there was seen increases in strength and peak force for both males and females. Again, there were no significant changes in IGF-1 for either gender, which re-emphasizes the probability that physical stress is responsible for increases in bone mass. The results of this study demonstrate that both males and females benefit from resistance exercise three times per week of both moderate and high intensities. None of the participants were injured during this study, indicating that intensities as high as 70% of a one repetition max are safe for most healthy elderly persons. High intensity resistance exercise favored bone formation slightly better than moderate intensity resistance exercise, especially for elderly men. If it is not safe to have an individual elderly client perform the high intensity exercise, then moderate to low intensity may be more appropriate. Even consider the possibility of combining intensities. Each resistance training program must be tailored for the specific individual, and each provides important benefits. The added benefits of increased lean mass and muscle strength are especially important for elderly clients as they may help prevent fall and injuries and preserve independence. Strength training also comes with the less visible benefit of lowering risk for multiple diseases. The only real way we can increase our metabolism, unless we take drugs, is to lift weights and to maintain or increase our lean mass. In doing so, this makes the body more sensitive to insulin and therefore more durable against certain diseases. Recent research suggests that lifting decreases women's risk of cardiovascular disease and type two diabetes. In a 2016 study from the Harvard Medical School and the National Institute of Health, data from over 36,000 older women between the ages of 47 and 98 years were asked to fill out questionnaires about an entire decade detailing their health and exercise levels. One of these specific questions asked women how much strength training they had done in the past year. The researchers then tracked which of the women had a heart attack or type two diabetes. It turns out whether or not a woman did strength training indicated a lot about her health. Compared to women who avoided strength training, those who did any amount of strength training were likely to have a lower body mass index and a healthier diet and also less likely to be a current smoker. Type two diabetes risk was 30% lower and cardiovascular disease risk was 17% lower. Even when controlling for variables such as age, vegetable and fruit intake and physical activity. But adding in aerobic training drove risks down even more. Those who did 120 minutes of aerobic exercise per week and some strength training lowered type two diabetes risk by 65%. Like the guidelines suggest, most people should do both aerobic and resistance exercise for the biggest gains. The number one reason old people end up leaving their homes and going to assisted living, they cannot stand up out of a chair, which makes sense. There's well documented evidence that muscle strength decreases with advancing age. Muscle strength decreases approximately 12 to 15% per decade after the age of 50 years in both age and physical activity. This is a result of both males and females. In addition, muscle mass also decreases with increased age. In a cross-sectional study of healthy men of equal mass, muscle mass comprised 24% of total mass and those aged 20 to 29 years, but decreased to 13% and participants aged 70 to 79 years. Numerous studies have validated that the decline in strength in older adults is associated with this age-related loss of muscle mass. Sounds kind of depressing, except resistance exercise training has been shown to increase muscle mass and therefore muscle strength, even in the older population. In healthy older men and women, four months of resistance training resulted in a 16 to 23% increase in muscle mass. Multiple studies have also demonstrated these same changes and that they can occur even in the ninth decade of life. In a systematic review of 41 articles, resistance exercise training in older adults was associated with gains in strength. In a Cochrane review of 74 studies, found similar results. Both reviews use studies that examines both healthy older adults and frail adults. Feotrone and colleagues showed that nursing home residents were able to increase their strength on average of 97% after 10 weeks of resistance exercise training. Because nursing home residents represent the frailest segment of older adults, this study demonstrates that the intervention is beneficial for even those most severely affected by frailty. Motor performance in older adults has also been shown to improve after resistance training. In a systematic review, Latham and colleagues found that resistance exercise training in healthy and frail elders improve their gait speed and also increased the distance covered in a six minute walk test. In studies of frail elders living in the nursing home and in the community, Feotrone and colleagues and Chandler and colleagues showed that 10 weeks of resistance training resulted in improved gait speed. There may be a dose response relationship between resistance exercise and motor performance because Galvao and Taffy found that subjects who did more repetitions of resistance exercise had almost twice the improvement in their 400 meter walk time compared to those who did fewer repetitions. And this, my friends, is what translate into what older adults really care about, performing activities of daily living, living independently, and staying in their own home. The standard lifting protocol is typically eight to 12 repetitions and repeated three to four sets. This is the most common recommendation for the introductory training programs in healthy populations and recommended in order to achieve maximal strength gains. The main advocates of multiple set training programs propose that multiple sets are superior for achieving optimal physiological adaptation. But have you ever wondered, what if I do less? How much benefit will I get? Well, these researchers did, and the purpose of this next study was to determine the effects of increasing the volume of weight training from one set to three sets upon body composition and muscular strength. In this study, 16 male weight trainers were randomly assigned to one of two training groups. Supervised weight training targeting the upper body was conducted three times per week for eight weeks using either one set or three sets of six repetitions to fatigue. Participants were measured before and after the training intervention for strength performance and body fat. Results of the study revealed that both training groups improved significantly, 20.7% in terms of muscular strength, with no significant differences being observed between the one set and the three set groups. Significant decreases were observed in skinfold measures for the one set group. Conclusions from this study are that one set of high intensity resistance training was as effective as three sets for increasing the strength of muscle groups in the upper body, and that one set protocol also produced significantly greater decreases in adiposity. So you don't have much time? No worries, one set doesn't take long. In fact, the calculated time taken to complete a one set training program was significantly lower than that taken to complete three. This approximated to a 66% decrease in exercise time. This reduction in time investment might have positive effects on training program compliance, reduced injury rate, and fatigue. But what if you don't belong to a gym? Calisthenics is a term used to define a generic set of body weight exercises. But how effective are calisthenics at increasing strength? That particular question was the aim of this study discussed here, was to evaluate calisthenics effects on posture, strength, and body composition in untrained individuals. In this research study, 28 male participants were divided into two groups, a calisthenic based intervention group and a control group. The study lasted for eight weeks, and each participant underwent a body composition analysis, a postural assessment, hand grip test, a pushup, and a pull up test. Each participant was tested at baseline and then again at post intervention. Results from the study show that the calisthenics group improved their posture with their eyes open and with their eyes closed. They also improved their strength by improving the number of pushups they completed and also the number of pull ups. Body composition was also improved. And there was no difference shown for the hand grip test. There were no significant differences displayed for any variable for the control group. Conclusions from this study indicate that calisthenic training is a feasible and effective method to improve posture, strength, and body composition without the use of any major training equipment. Strength training. It doesn't matter if you're young or very, very old. You can increase your muscle strength. Resistance training is the only way to increase the size of your skeletal muscles. You can use weight machines, free weights, and your own body weight to get results. And it doesn't have to take very long because for many, one set carries the same strength because for many, one set carries the same benefits as multiple sets. It seems like a no brainer to me. And as Arnold says, resistance training in the gym and in life can only build a stronger character.
