 sat for about three hours a day. 21 hours sedentary if you count sleep. Our ancestors from even just a hundred years ago sat for about three hours a day. And sitting too much contributes to many health complications like overeating, hypertension, diabetes, obesity, and even sleep. And sitting too much contributes to many health complications like overeating, hypertension, diabetes, obesity, amongst others. Welcome back everyone. I'm Dr. Carmen Swain, your instructor, who each week encourages you to move more. And today we are going to discuss the pitfalls that exist when we do the opposite of moving. And we just sit there. Sitting is the new smoking that causes the most stress. Sitting is the new smoking? I'm sure. Yeah, it sounds a little out there. But think about it though. Especially if you think of your life after college when you're a full on adult. What do you do? You wake up. And then you sit down and eat breakfast. You might browse your social media feeds, catch up on some news or maybe some emails. And then you drive or take the train to work sitting down. You're at work for 8 maybe even 10 hours even eating your lunch in your chair. Then you commute back home only to crash on the couch and to watch some TV and eat some dinner before heading to bed and repeating the cycle again. This is probably not far off for most folks. And unbeknownst to most even if you exercise for an hour a day you cannot mitigate those harms of sitting for the rest of the day. The human body was meant to move and the brain needs the body to move in order for it to function and develop optimally. That goes for adults as much as for kids. The main concept the heart of it all of sitting being the new smoking is this concept of NEAT. Non-Exercise Activity Thermogenesis. NEAT. This is the energy expended for everything that we do that is not sleeping, eating or sports like exercise. It ranges from the energy expended like walking to work, typing performing yard work, undertaking agricultural tasks and even things like fidgeting. Even trivial physical activities increase our metabolic rate. Substantially even. And it is the cumulative impact of a multitude of exothermic actions that culminate in an individual's daily NEAT. It is therefore not surprising that NEAT explains a vast majority of an individual's non-resting energy needs. Some epidemiological studies have highlighted the importance of culture in promoting NEAT. We know that agricultural and manual workers have high NEAT. Whereas the wealthy and industrialization appears to decrease NEAT. Let's look a little closer at the importance of NEAT. Most people believe exercise is the key to weight loss and health. While it certainly is important there is another physical activity that may be far more important. Movement. Dr. James Levine is credited for his research and findings on NEAT. According to Dr. Levine, you can expend calories in one of two ways. One is to go to the gym. And the other is through all the activities of daily living called NEAT. And it appears that NEAT is far more important for calorie burning than exercise in nearly everyone. It's technically referred to as non-exercise associated thermogenesis. NEAT sounds kind of fancy but it's often ignored. But a crucial part of our metabolism. You see NEAT burns 200% more daily calories than exercise. The tick tick ticking of the clock and the furious patter of computer keys are staples in offices around the world. Regardless of the specific business, offices share many similarities. One such similarity is a sedentary culture. In the last 50 years the number of moderately active jobs has steadily declined. While the sedentary and light activity jobs have increased. This increasing trend is also seen in the prevalence of obesity in US adults. That has steadily ticked upward over the past 50 years. Which has put us in a position we are now. A national epidemic. The truth is evident. Americans are spending more time seated than ever before. And researchers agree it's wreaking havoc on our bodies. Why does sitting cause so much damage? How does sitting impact you physiologically? How does it hurt your body? Well let me tell you. As soon as you sit the electrical activity in your leg muscles turns off. Your caloric burn drops down to just one calorie per minute. The enzymes that help break down fat drop 90%. And after two hours of sitting your good cholesterol drops 20%. After 24 hours your insulin effectiveness drops 24% and your risk of diabetes increases. People with sitting jobs have twice the rate of cardiovascular disease as people with standing jobs. Another reason that the smoking analogy is relevant is that studies have repeatedly shown that the effects of long term sitting are not reversible through exercise or other good habits. A study published in the American Journal of Epidemiology found that men and women who sat more than six hours a day died earlier than their counterparts who limited sitting time to three hours a day or less. The study surveyed over 53,000 men and over 69,000 women who were healthy at the start of the study. And over the course of the next 14 year follow up they saw a higher rate of mortality amongst the frequent sitters. Associations were strongest for cardiovascular disease mortality. And the time spent sitting was independently associated with total mortality regardless of a person's physical activity level. Sitting, like smoking, is very clearly bad for our health. And the only way to minimize the risk is to limit the time we spend on our butts each day. If you need a little bit more encouragement, take a look back at all the ways sitting is killing you. And then scour Pinterest to find some ways to make your own standing desk. And researchers in Australia agree. Even if you engaged in the recommended daily and weekly levels of physical activity but you spend a lot of time sitting, you still increase your risk for chronic diseases. And also a shortened life span. This active couch potato, so to speak, that is a person who accumulates the recommended 30 minutes of physical activity but then spends the rest of the day seated or sedentary is still at a greater or increased risk of death and increased disease risk. How does too much sitting affect your health? How does too much sitting affect our health? Physical activity is defined as any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscle that requires energy expenditure. Physical inactivity, lack of physical activity, has been identified as the fourth leading risk factor for global mortality. Moreover, physical inactivity is estimated to be the main cause for numerous other disease burdens. Globally, around 31% of adults were insufficiently active back in 2008. This is approximately 28% of males and 34% of females. Approximately 3.2 million deaths each year are attributed to insufficient physical activity. Globally, the prevalence of insufficient physical activity is highest in the Americas and the eastern Mediterranean region. In both of these regions, almost 50% of women are insufficiently active, while the prevalence for men is about 40%. Comparatively, the southeast Asian region showed the lowest percentages. 15% for males and 19% in activity for females. In all of the world's regions, men are more active than women, with the biggest difference being between the two sexes in eastern Mediterranean regions. The current levels of physical inactivity are partly due to insufficient participation in physical activity during leisure time and an increase in sedentary behavior during occupational and domestic activities. Likewise, an increase in the use of passive modes of transport has also been associated with declining physical activity levels. Another factor, increased urbanization, has resulted in several environmental factors which may discourage participation in physical activities. Things such as high-density traffic, violence, low air quality, pollution, lack of parks, sidewalks, and sports or recreational facilities. What we need are population-based, multi-sectoral, multidisciplinary, and culturally relevant policies that are implemented to increase physical activity levels globally. Research has shown us that over 30% of cardiovascular disease cases are a direct result of too much sitting. Middle-aged men who sat more hours per week and obtained less physical activity had a greater risk for premature myocardial infarction or a heart attack, as seen in caption A. Those who sit more also have higher mortality from coronary artery disease, as seen in figure C. These general findings were subsequently confirmed in studies in middle-aged women in reference B, and also in the elderly group, A, C, and D. Researchers have found and continue to find evidence that prolonged sitting increases the risk of developing several serious illnesses, like various types of cancer, heart disease, and type 2 diabetes. Research also indicates that physical inactivity is estimated to be the main cause for approximately 30% of diabetes cases. A goal of one research study was to determine whether or not interrupting prolonged sitting with brief bouts of light intensity walking or simple resistance activities would improve after-meal cardiometabolic risk markers in adults with type 2 diabetes. In a randomized crossover trial, 24 inactive, overweight, or obese adults with type 2 diabetes underwent the following 8-hour conditions on three separate days. Either uninterrupted sitting or sitting plus 3-minute bouts of light walking every 30 minutes, or sitting with 3-minute bouts of simple resistance activities every 30 minutes. Standardized meals were consumed during each condition and glucose, insulin, C-peptide, and triglycerides were compared between conditions. Conclusions from this study show that interrupting prolonged sitting with brief bouts of light walking or simple resistance activities attenuates the acute post-meal glucose, insulin, C-peptide, and triglyceride response in adults with type 2 diabetes. We know that this population has poor adherence to structured exercise. But this simple approach yields a potentially beneficial and practical way to impact health. Can sitting actually increase your risk of cancer? Data from 43 observational studies, including a total of thousands and thousands and thousands of cancer studies have been analyzed. And results reveal that sedentary behavior is associated with increased risk of certain types of cancer. It has also been determined that too much inactivity impacts obesity and overweight in our population. Inactivity over prolonged periods of time precedes weight gain and promotes increases in fat mass and obesity. We also know that our non-exercise activity thermogenesis is a highly variable component of our daily total energy expenditure. NEAT is an important contributor to weight maintenance and could represent a promising tool for body mass control. In our busy modern world, it seems evident that both biological and overwhelming environmental influences facilitate a seated lifestyle. Because of the enormity of the problem of obesity in our society, and because of the magnitude of NEAT deficit, it has been suggested that we should design and evaluate both our personal behavioral approaches and re-engineered environments in order to promote active life and health. In terms of appropriate activities, it can be relatively easy to increase NEAT. Move more. Standing instead of sitting burns three times more calories per hour. Gum chewing increases energy expenditure four times. And stair climbing more than 40 times above your resting values. Ambulation, walking in particular, can raise NEAT and it is easily performed at almost any place and at any time. But how can a goal of 2.5 hours of additional ambulation, standing time, be realistically integrated into our daily routines? A key problem is that our occupations and our personal lives regularly contribute to and prohibit this degree of adaptation. One's occupation is to be able to adapt to the needs of people with a physical activity or physical activity. What's need at the site of occupation? Appreciation is the principle determinant of NEAT in adulthood and can represent an efficient means of promoting physical activity. How NEAT can be primarily integrated at the site of occupation needs examining. With billions of people worldwide performing jobs in front of computers or around conference tables, it's time to rebel against workday inactivity and to adopt new approaches that encourage movement. Frequent low intensity physical activity, such as intermittent standing during the workday, has far reaching benefits associated with employee health, wellness, productivity, and satisfaction. This in turn can have a positive organizational impact on corporate culture, absenteeism, presenteeism, retention, and healthcare costs. Whether it's standing meetings, walking paths, sit to stand workstations, employers can embrace movement in a way that has a positive impact on employee health and productivity every single day. I think neat is pretty neat, and I hope you do too. I want you to consider all the ways you may be sitting too much. Eating, driving, riding the bus, studying, scrolling social media, watching TV. Now I want you to consider ways that you could increase your neat. Try them out and report back in our discussion this week. What's your favorite way to increase your neat? ["Onions of Possible"]
