 Welcome to your weekly wrap up everyone. Let's wrap up our discussion of sleep by going over some tips to improve your sleep and how to feel rested when you wake up. First off, as we have already talked about this week, it is important, imperative to create a sleep schedule. During the weekdays, you should try to go to bed and wake up around the same time each day. This practice allows your body to adapt to your routine and to create a natural sleep and wake cycle. This will help to make you fall asleep quickly and wake up more rested after doing this practice regularly. Next, be aware of your exposure to light before you fall asleep. Light plays a central role in regulating circadian rhythm, the body's internal clock that signals when to be alert and when to rest. Light also affects the production of melatonin, an essential sleep promoting hormone. Studies have shown that blue light triggers your mind to be more awake and alert. So consider switching your phone or laptop to night mode to reduce your exposure to blue light. Also, make sure your sleeping environment is dark when you fall asleep. Try not to leave the TV on or have other sources of light present when it is time for bed. If you don't have control over the shades or stickers to keep out light, use a sleep mask. Use a dim, warm colored nightlight in areas that you may need to traverse, like the bathroom. It's also important to be aware of what you eat before you sleep. Substances like sugar and caffeine can make you restless when you're trying to fall asleep. Also, you should try not to go to sleep hungry or too full. It is best to eat a full meal several hours before going to bed to avoid snacking and also to achieve the best sleep. If you are having trouble getting enough sleep at night, or you do not feel rested when you wake up in the morning, we encourage you to try following these tips. As you have learned this week, sleep and recovery is crucial to your overall health and performance while you are awake. So pay attention to your sleep habits and make a change for the better.
