 Welcome back to our wrap-up discussion. Today, let's finish our conversation about weight loss. This week, you learned about weight loss myths and how diet and exercise are implemented in weight loss strategies. Now let's discuss how to combine our knowledge of nutrition and fitness to see the health benefits of weight loss. Like other types of change, weight loss requires behavior change, which can be really difficult to commit to. This behavior change can be made easier though by losing weight via a step-by-step process. Weight management requires a balance between both physical activity and a healthy diet, but it may be best to begin by improving your diet alone. Why is this? Well studies have shown that diet, including the volume of food consumed and how many nutrients the food contains, is more impactful initially to weight loss than just looking at exercise. But in the long term, to be successful at keeping weight off, a combination of a healthy diet and consistent physical activity is key. A healthy person absolutely needs to manage both, but it is easier to begin by doing one step at a time. It's also important to keep in mind that eating well with the right amount of fuel and being physically active improves health regardless of body size. So engaging in these behaviors improves energy, mood, sleep, and many other benefits we've shared already this semester. Exactly. And as you learned in lecture, losing weight occurs by utilizing more calories than you ingest. But when you exercise, you burn a lot of calories, right? Yes. But also, you get very hungry as a result of all that exercise. Keep in mind, if you start your weight loss journey by only exercising, you may not make much of an impact if your diet is still unchanged. Or if this excess exercise causes you to ingest as many calories as you just burned. Breaking behaviors up into multiple steps is a great way to develop healthy habits. Even if weight loss is not a personal goal that you have, it's likely that you know someone or you have someone that you care about who would like to lose weight. It is important to know that change does not happen overnight. Research supports that successful behavior change results from slowly adapting to a new behavior with small, repeated successes rather than starting a change abruptly or implementing too much change all at once. Small steps, repeatedly taken, is the best way to create sustainable lifestyle changes.
