 Welcome back to the weekly wrap-up. In this week's lecture, you learned about how exercise and diet can fit within your personal budget, as well as how proper lifestyle habits can decrease your overall medical costs. Let's wrap up this unit by identifying how making good choices prevents unnecessary treatment and medical costs. One fact that we stressed this week is that exercise and nutrition can be used to prevent the development of chronic diseases. In 2021, people with large employer private insurance coverage who had obesity or overweight diagnosed and diagnosis averaged $8,000 more dollars in health care spending compared to those with no obesity or overweight diagnosis on their health insurance claims. The comparisons between someone with and without diabetes are even more pronounced. These costs add up over time. Additionally, obesity may cause many long-term health issues. Conditions that are associated with obesity include hypertension, heart disease, and an increased risk of stroke, which can lead to even higher medical costs down the road. Many of the costs associated with obesity can effectively be prevented or treated by using exercise and diet as an intervention. Even when weight is not reduced, eating more fruits and vegetables and getting fit can protect a person from high cholesterol, high blood pressure, and other important biomarkers. The most important nutrients for weight loss are eating more fiber, protein, and fluids, a nutritious diet that will fill you up without ingesting too many calories to prevent weight gain. One way this could be done is by eating more whole foods and less fast foods. Processed or fast food contains preservatives and unhealthy ingredients that are highly caloric and lack nutrient density. But fresh foods such as fruits and vegetables contain vitamins and fiber which will fill you up quicker and keep you fuller for longer. We've been building on a theme in this course. The foods that are higher quality in nature with high nutrient density and phytochemicals serve as valuable building blocks to build a healthier you and also fight off any other foods. Another positive choice that you can make to prevent additional medical costs is by doing resistance training and stretching to both strengthen your muscles and promote better posture and stability. In our busy modern society, we are often sitting down, sitting down to work or to study for long long periods of time. Sometimes the entire day. During time spent seated, we are typically hunched over a computer or a device which causes poor posture and if not combated through strengthening exercise, our posture will continue to degrade over time due to the lack of strength in our stabilizers. And this condition often leads to back and neck pain which is a very common issue today. And we often see those with this condition treated in physical therapy and even interventions such as surgery. But guess what? This problem can be prevented by doing proper exercise and stretching to strengthen both the neck and back muscles to improve your stabilization and decrease back pain. As we wrap up think about the key takeaways from this week. What are some other ways that creating healthy lifestyle habits can help you avoid future medical treatment and save money? What are some other ways that you can help your family and friends? What are some other ways that creating healthy lifestyle habits can help you avoid future medical treatment and save money? And how could you use this information in your life?
