 Hello everyone, welcome to your weekly wrap-up. Let's continue our discussion of exercise and nutrition as a habit. Throughout this course, we have routinely emphasized the importance of habit formation on developing a healthy exercise and diet plan. This time, let's change things up a bit. We are going to present a situation and analyze how habit formation influences a more reliable behavior change in a college student, just like you. Hey, Julie, can you tell us about the student that we are going to follow in this case study? Brutus is a third-year student at Ohio State, taking food dysfunction and movement as medicine. He keeps himself fairly busy as he is taking 16 credit hours of classes this semester, volunteers regularly, and works multiple times a week as a receptionist at the University Hospital. Despite his busy schedule, Brutus has learned in class about the importance of exercise and nutrition in strengthening his body, relieving stress, and preventing chronic disease. He really wanted to improve these aspects of his life, but his busy student life has resulted in him living a sedentary lifestyle and ordering fast food from GrubHub because he doesn't have time to prepare his own meals. Last week, Brutus tried to take initiative and change his ways all at once. He went to the RPAC to work out four days in a row at different times each day and cooked his own dinner for three days as well. However, Brutus soon ran out of fresh food at his apartment and didn't have time during the week to go to the store. Additionally, he was really sore from exercising at the gym and lost his initiative to work out. This week, he's back to his old habits. What should Brutus do to improve his chances of regularly implementing a healthy diet and exercise routine? While Brutus failed to implement his behavior change in a sustainable manner, he was wise to recognize the fact that he needed to change his habits in order to improve his overall health. However, he tried to make long-term change too quickly, resulting in an unsustainable routine. When you create a habit or routine, the most important element is consistency, not intensity. Health does not change overnight. You have to make sustainable change in order to create a habit. For this reason, it may be best to begin by making a schedule. Brutus is a busy student, so he should map out a time each week to go to the store to buy the foods that he needs. Additionally, he should plan his workout schedule, including what time of day he will go to the gym, and what type of exercise he should target. These would be great first steps for Brutus. When making a plan, it is very important to ease into a new routine. For the first few weeks, it may be best for Brutus to work out only a few days per week and prepare his own meals two or three times more than normal. This will prevent these routines from becoming a burden immediately, which prevents burnout. Again, the goal is to make a habit that will last. If you ease into your new routine, you will have a more positive attitude than if you were forcing yourself to make a change constantly. It is best to break things up into multiple steps. For example, instead of developing a new routine for diet and exercise at the same time, Brutus would benefit from forming these habits separately. He should make a habit out of preparing his own meals regularly as a first step, and then form a habit of exercising subsequently. This will prevent Brutus from making himself too stressed out in his busy lifestyle by trying to create two behavior changes at once. Overall, these tips are important for Brutus to make a sustainable change. Remember that forming a habit is crucial to creating a healthy exercise and diet plan. Think about how you relate to Brutus in this example. Have you ever tried to make a change too fast and fallen short of your goal as a result? What advice do you have for Brutus to achieve his goals?
